Anatomy of a Toolbox Card• TITLEA two- to five-word title to name this card. • QUOTEAn example of something a parent/caregiver might say to their child while trying this activity. • EXPLANATION OF CARDA few short sentences explaining the reason for the card. • TAKEAWAYA brief, factual statement about a child during this stage of development, explaining why this card is important. Each Toolbox card offers the following tips:• OVERVIEWThis section summarizes the central takeaway message that the Toolbox card is meant to communicate. If it is relevant, you can read the description to a parent/caregiver exactly as written, or you can put the message into your own words, speaking from your own experience. • PRACTICEThis section provides suggestions on how you can put the Toolbox card into action with the parent/caregiver. It provides suggestions for how to implement the card in the home or in the centre. There are some exceptions, where a card topic is not relevant to centre or group-based settings, such as the cards in Prenatal, Pregnancy and Birth. We strongly recommend that you read both the “In the Home” and “In the Centre” sections on each card, as the information provided in each is generally applicable to both contexts.   “In the Home”This section describes how the card can be implemented with materials generally found in the home. It is written with the individual child in mind.  “In the Centre”This section describes using the card with the materials generally available in an early learning centre. It is written with a group of children in mind.  • REFLECTIONThis section offers a list of questions for you to consider about your own experiences and practice, as well as to encourage parents/caregivers to reflect on how the card relates to their own life.• BUILDS ONThis section lists which cards from the “0-24 Month Early Years Toolbox” that the specific Toolbox card builds on. It is included to enhance your work with children and families by allowing you to reference and review previous cards.  • NOTESThis section provides a space for you to make notes about the card topic. Your notes can include culturally specific considerations on the topic, useful or relevant personal stories, personal reminders and/or individual comments related to Understanding the Early Years course material. • RESOURCESThis section gives more information about the card topic, allowing Visitors and caregivers to prepare Toolbox card activities in advance. This section can include handouts or resources they can use with families, or that they can give to families to use with a Toolbox card. The resources here are meant to support learning more about the Toolbox card topic.