Cree LanguageLanguage is the foundation of thinking, literacy, and numeracy skills, and of social and emotional well-being. Children are born ready to learn language. In fact, they begin to learn language in the last trimester of pregnancy, before birth. When babies interact with caring adults from an early age, it helps them build future language skills. Young children understand words before they use them. Understanding comes before talking.  Even before a child can speak, she stores words in her brain. By 12 months of age, children understand words, particularly familiar words, such as their name, other people’s names, and “bye-bye.” Having conversations with young children introduces them to new words and ideas so they can learn to express themselves.  A child’s ability to pay attention to objects and events together with another person is called “joint attention.” This skill is usually well established at about 18 months of age. Pointing, touching, and describing objects and events are ways to help a child develop joint attention skills. When an adult shows a child how to point and communicate, she will mimic the action, and will begin to communicate by pointing and then looking at the adult for a response. This is how children communicate before they can speak. Talking, listening, joint attention, and conversations are essential to helping a child learn to read, write, and understand numbers. All of the activities in the Early Years Toolbox can be carried out in a language chosen by parents/caregivers. Learning a second or third language is easier in early childhood than it is later in life because babies’ brains are shaped by the languages they hear. Simple picture books, songs, endearments, and phrases in a traditional language provide an opportunity for children to become familiar with the sounds and rhythm of their traditional language, even if adults are not fluent. Language Matters strategies are examples of language interactions that families can repeat over and over and expand on. The strategies can make language part of every daily event. Language is one way to show children warmth, love, and positive feelings. As an EY Visitor, you can use the Language Matters activities with family members to raise awareness about how they use language with infants and young children, so that language becomes intentional, rather than random or accidental. 