Family Well-BeingHealthy families grow healthy children. Taking care of family well-being means helping parents/caregivers take care of themselves and connect with broader family and community networks. Connecting babies and young children with extended family and community builds a sense of belonging and identity. Families benefit when they are supported by others in their community. With the arrival of a new baby, almost everything changes, including schedules, sleep, priorities and parents’ identities. As adults settle into their new routines, each day is about finding a balance between caregiving, playing with the baby and taking care of themselves. Overall family wellness teaches a child how to be happy and healthy. Family members all live under the same emotional skin, meaning that each member is affected by the emotions of the others. Parents/caregivers should regularly reflect on how their own feelings and interactions with their child affect his well-being. They can consider how their child interacts with others and support him in developing friendships with other children.  Positive parent/caregiver–child interactions lead to positive social behaviours and positive peer relationships. Children learn to treat others the way they are treated; when cared for with kindness, they are motivated to treat others the same way. Many parents/caregivers get their parenting style from their own parents. Reflecting on how their own parents and grandparents responded to their needs and how their parents created boundaries will help parents/caregivers better understand why they parent the way they do. As a child becomes more independent, parents/caregivers often begin to think about what the next steps are for themselves and their family. Some want to return to work or school, enroll their baby in childcare or start to plan to expand their family. It is natural that when parents/caregivers set goals for their own lives, they think about the effect their choices will have on their children. Preschool drop-in programs, specialized programming and childcare can support a child’s early learning while parents/caregivers work toward their own goals in life. This teaches children that their parents/caregivers are role models who can set and fulfill goals for themselves. Connecting with other parents/caregivers can help parents/caregivers talk through their thoughts, clarify their goals and find out what they need to achieve those goals. Forming a community of other parents/caregivers, family members and service providers ensures they have the support system they need to be successful. 