Meaningful MomentsOne very important way that babies and young children learn is through play. Child-centred activities that involve a back-and-forth exchange between a baby or young child and a parent/caregiver are fun for everyone. In addition to having enormous educational value, parents/caregivers can enjoy the process of seeing their child learn and grow. Play activities should match a child’s stage of development, needs and interests. As a parent/caregiver and a baby interact through play, the baby’s physical and thinking skills emerge. This builds on her capacity for joint attention. Each new skill she develops adds to her ongoing brain development, body movement capabilities and her specific goals or preferences, all in accordance with her environment. A baby’s gross and fine motor skills require a lot of practice to develop. Gross motor development refers to the development of the large muscles of her body (arms, legs and trunk). Fine motor development refers to her ability to use and coordinate the small muscles of her hands. Babies need daily opportunities to practise both gross and fine motor skills. Unstructured blocks of time for play are crucial to healthy child development. During play, a child gets to be the expert in her own development. She will choose the play that is perfectly suited to her developmental abilities. Through observation, parents/caregivers can get to know what their child is interested in and what sustains her attention for extended periods of time. They can see what she is good at and what she finds challenging. Playing with other children is a major milestone for children between the ages of 24 to 48 months. Human beings are social creatures; much of our days involve talking to and working with others. A child practises what she knows about practical situations by acting them out in pretend play. Pretend play helps a child with literacy development as she builds stories, with language development as she talks and listens to others, and with social-emotional development as she cooperates and solves problems with others.  Parents/caregivers should remain wary of activities that require very little movement, such as prolonged periods of sitting, watching TV, playing video games or even riding in a car. Children learn best when they can move their whole body, and positive behaviours increase when children burn energy in a constructive way. This can be easily achieved by engaging children in one or two Toolbox card activities every day. Play activities, such as those found in the Meaningful Moments Toolbox cards, should challenge what a child knows and build on what she can do, but they should not overwhelm her. Playing can be integrated into both the daily care routine and during playtime. Parents/caregivers can take advantage of naturally occurring opportunities to play during the day. They can notice and build on what their child is already interested in and encourage her with smiles, positive comments and a playful approach. Activities can be repeated many times, as long as they are fun, interactive and provide a challenge that is just right for the child’s level of development. You can talk about your own experience with play activities and encourage parents/caregivers to integrate one or two play interactions into their daily routines on a consistent basis. The Meaningful Moments Toolbox card activities focus on a suite of emerging skills, including skills related to music, movement, sensory awareness, problem-solving, pretending and understanding concepts. 