<episode>Supporting Baby’s Gifts<index>FAMILY WELL-BEING | 1<tagline>Notice parts of baby's personality that make her unique. Talk about qualities her namesake/avvaq was also known for.<takeaway>Finding ways to strengthen baby’s gifts helps parents guide her to fulfil her life’s purpose.<overview>Inuit say that each child is set on a life path from birth. This begins with the name and blessings given to the newborn. It becomes a responsibility of the parent to continually share this information as your baby develops into her own unique person. One of a parent’s main tasks is to know baby so well that they can build on her gifts and help her in the other areas where she needs more support. Carefully observing your child and noticing preferences and interestsis essential to supporting her healthy development. By trying to find baby’s interests and gifts, parents can help her to develop positive self-esteem. This describes how baby feels about herself and translates into what she believes she is capable of accomplishing.<practice>Spend uninterrupted quality time with baby to observe her in play. When you observe her, watch which toys she plays with often and in what areas she is talented. At this stage in baby’s life she is beginning to show lots of personality traits that make her an individual. This could include: having likes and dislikes, favourite items, interests, or capabilities. Adults can ask themselves, “What makes my baby unique?” “What characteristics is she showing?”Other gifts may become obvious through play. If baby is always playing with baby dolls, she may have gifts in parenting, teaching, or healing one day. You can nurture baby’s gifts by giving her more opportunities to explore them. When she plays with her dolls you may offer her blankets, baby clothes, spoons and bowls so that she can further her interest in babies. A baby with a gift for expression and emotion may struggle with how do deal with her gift when she is a toddler. While she is young her gift may look like outbursts or tantrums, but as an adult she may become a talented artist, poet, or musician. Parents can help to guide baby by modelling appropriate ways of dealing with emotions and effective ways of expressing them. Adults may work with baby to express emotions through art, song, drama or physical activity.<reflection>What are your gifts and how do you share them with others? How were your gifts nurtured as a child?Is there anything you would like to do differently for your child?<keywords>unique; character traits; interests; individual; child's lead; observation; patience; positive; guidance; guide;<episode>Gifts<index>FAMILY WELL-BEING | 2<tagline>Children will each be gifted in a variety of ways. It is important to closely observe children and to take notice of the gifts they demonstrate in order to nurture those throughout their lives.<takeaway>Gifts are not just characteristics or interests of a child, but actual talents and innate abilities which need to be noticed, developed and remarked upon to the child. For Inuit, these gifts should always be used in the service of others.<overview>While it is often obvious what interests and character traits a child demonstrates early in life it may take much longer to discover her gifts. Gifts are often observed when a child is given lots of varied experiences and opportunities for exploration and expression. The more opportunities a child has, the more potential for discovering a gift early on. A gift carries with it a passion for using the gift to the exclusion of other activities. Inuit say that a child should be allowed to expand the gift so that it can be used in the service of others/pijitsirniq.<practice>Be mindful of all the potential opportunities for your child to explore and develop various aspects of her personality. Encourage her to spend time with those in the community who can expose her to new experiences and share their passions and talents. It is important that baby is part of a community. Baby’s gifts may lie in an area where you are not as skilled. You may find a friend, family member, or Elder who can help to support baby’s gift. For example, if baby loves drumming but you don’t know many songs, find someone who can spend time with baby singing and drumming. In the past, if a child’s gift was discovered then working with someone who could help develop this gift in positive ways was arranged. Inuit often gave a small gift to someone to support this kind of child development by becoming a sanajii (maker) to the child.<reflection>How can you begin to notice baby’s gifts?Who else in the community can support baby in developing her gifts? How can you support your child to use her gifts in service to others?<keywords>unique; character traits; interests; individual; child's lead; observation; patience; positive; guidance; guide;<episode>Male Role Models<index>FAMILY WELL-BEING | 3<tagline>Think about who can be positive role models for your child and make sure your child spends time with these people.<takeaway>A male role model comes in many forms – Father, Grandfather, Uncles, Brothers, or Friends, but Uncles are always a significant relationship for a child.<overview>Men have an important role to play in raising babies. When men are involved in baby’s life as she grows up, baby will develop a positive understanding about men and their roles. Babies will learn that men can be strong and supportive as well as caring and nurturing. Baby will form healthy opinions of men. She will build friendships and relationships later in her life that reflect the positive experiences she had with men while she was growing up.Men have different styles of being involved with babies than mothers usually do. Mothers may be more emotional and gentle, while men tend to be active and physical. The balance of both of these styles work well together in developing the whole child. Men who have not been shown love in their past may have a hard time opening up to their partners or babies. But spending time with baby helps fathers as well as babies. When people spend time with babies, the level of oxytocin—the hormone that makes you feel happy—in their body increases. This can reduce a person’s depression. Over time, it also helps men become more nurturing and in tune with their own emotions. As a result, they become more responsive to baby’s needs. Men will want to be involved with baby more when they see that baby is comforted and calmed by their actions.<practice>It takes time to learn how to be a good father or role model to babies. Decide who will take on this role and how they can be involved. Anyone who is new to spending time with babies will need some support. Men in baby’s life can take part in using the EY Toolbox cards.Encourage the men in your child’s life to take part in caregiving routines. Changing diapers, mealtimes, and getting dressed all help to create strong bonds.More than toys or fancy clothes, babies just need your time. Think of ways that men in your life can spend quality time with baby. They can sit on the floor and play, go for walks, or read books together. Spending time with someone who is genuine will create special moments that baby will remember the most.<reflection>Who were the important men in your life when you were a child? How were they involved?What did they teach you?What are your initial feelings about men being involved in your child’s life?If baby's father cannot be there, who can have a kinship relationship with your child to provide positive male influence?<keywords>father; dad; grandfather; grandpa; uncle; family; friends<episode>Educate and Advocate<index>FAMILY WELL-BEING | 4<tagline>Be the voice baby needs when she cannot speak for herself.<takeaway>Learn as much as you can and know who to ask for help when you or baby needs support.<overview>Babies do not have the voice or the insight to fight for what they need. They rely on their caregivers to speak for them. Encourage adults to learn about their children’s development and the supports and services that are available. That way, their family will get the best care possible.There are many different times during baby’s life when her caregivers will need some extra support. Dealing with service providers can become overwhelming or stressful. This can cause adults to “check out.” EY Visitors can give adults the tools they need to be effective advocates. This will benefit the child by ensuring her needs are met. It will also benefit the adults by giving them the confidence to handle similar situations in the future. By becoming educated and practising advocacy, adults begin to feel in control of their own lives. In turn, this increases their hope for the future. Baby will begin to model herself after her strong family members.EY Visitors can work with the family to strengthen a parent’s voice.<practice>Adults can learn as much about their children as possible by asking themselves, “what do I want for my child?” “What is my child really good at?” and “What is my child still working towards?”Adults can be a model for baby. Practice opening gateways of communications with others in the community in a casual way. Saying “Hello” or “Good Morning” is an easy way to build relationships. When adults and baby see the benefits of communication, this reinforces the positive effects that come from it.Sometimes there are struggles with children that come up again and again. When this happens, it can help adults to write a note to themselves about their concerns. They can bring the note with them as a reminder the next time they visit their doctor, social worker, or EY Visitor. Another idea is to have someone sit with parents at appointments to listen and take notes. Adults may need their EY Visitor to tell them about services that are available, and to help them prepare what they are going to ask or say.Adults need to know their rights and what they are entitled to. Building a strong support system around the family can help adults understand what they need so they can speak up for themselves and their families.<reflection>What are your first feelings going in to speak to someone about your child’s needs? What can help you to feel confident and effective?Who did you practise with beforehand? How did it go? What would you like to do differently next time?<keywords>informed choice; voice; scaffolding; advocacy; education; parents; additional support needs; disability;<episode>Roles and Responsibilities<index>FAMILY WELL-BEING | 5<tagline>Each adult and child has responsibilities to help maintain the household. Doing these tasks is part of pijitsirniq.<takeaway>Baby will gain a sense of responsibility and pride when she has age-appropriate tasks to complete and can contribute to helping others.<overview>Each member of the family – immediate, extended, and kin – have roles to play. For example, baby puts her toys away, Mom goes to work, big brother picks his siblings up from school, and Ataataa makes dinner.While it’s good for children to have time for free play, it is also good for everybody to take ownership of a small piece of the whole family system. This makes sure that one caregiver does not have too much of the work. It also builds a sense of responsibility in the children. The family is the centre of baby’s community. How everyone works together shows baby how things also work outside of the home.<practice>Around this age, baby will enjoy taking part in small chores around the house. See what she enjoys doing and can do by herself. Let her finish the task. As baby grows, she will see the people around her working hard to make sure the family is safe, happy, and healthy.Completing household tasks alongside an adult makes them much more fun. Baby will enjoy the challenge of bringing plates from the table to the sink or holding the dustpan while you sweep. It can be lots of fun learning how to fold laundry or stirring the dough for bannock. As baby grows older some of these tasks will become her responsibility to do regularly. Adults are teaching baby now how to accomplish these tasks on her own someday. This will build baby’s pride in her home and family.<reflection>What were your household responsibilities as a child? How old were you when you started doing them?How do you feel about baby taking on responsibility?How would you respond if baby refuses to complete the task?<keywords>tasks; chores; jobs; family; independence;<episode>Parenting Styles<index>FAMILY WELL-BEING | 6<tagline>Think about the style of parenting that describes you best. Understand the inunnguiniq concept of making a capable human being rather than a fragile egg or hardened rock child.<takeaway>Being responsive and setting reasonable boundaries is helpful when parenting.<overview>The way adults raise their children is often modelled on their own upbringing. All parents want the best for their children regardless of how they express it.There are two main characteristics that combine to create a parenting style. One is responsiveness, which describes how the adult understands and responds to the child’s needs and interests. The other is expectations, which are the rules/values parents have for their children, and how they enforce those expectations.Responsiveness and expectations exist in every family, but each family through their individual parenting styles has their own way of responding and setting expectations.Adults who experienced hardship through their childhood will choose to make changes in their own time when they are fully ready to heal. Until then, the EY Visitor should build strong relationships with families no matter what the parenting styles are. Find the positive parenting moments and build on those. Parenting styles resources are meant to be used as information for parents, only encouraging, rather than insisting on change.<practice>Adults can begin by thinking about their own childhood, and how that affects their own parenting style. It is helpful to reflect on: What do I want to do in the same way my parents did? What would I like to do differently?There are many ways to parent. Having information about some of the pitfalls resulting from parenting extremes can help you establish a balanced approach. Talking in groups with other parents who have children of similar ages can help give insight.Parenting is a lifelong journey that takes time. It is full of both challenges and celebrations. Adults can share their stories and listen to others. They can also review the parenting styles chart to decide where they fit and set small goals for the future.<reflection>How have your experiences as a child affected who you are as a parent? What do you know about Inuit concepts of inunnguiniq?What are your initial reactions when you notice someone parenting their child differently than you? How do you work to connect with other parents?<keywords>reflection; cycle; influence; education; parents; grandparents; choice;<episode>Back to Work<index>FAMILY WELL-BEING | 7<tagline>Think about the next stages for you and baby’s life.<takeaway>Decide what steps you will need to take to go back to work or school.<overview>Families go through various stages in their lives. As children grow, they need new experiences that will help them be successful adults. These include involvement with larger groups of children and learning how to get along with new people. Baby is a social being. When she gets closer to 2 years old, she will want to play with other children. Childcare is a good choice that can meet the child’s needs and make it possible for the family to invest in their own growth. Parents can decide what this looks like for them.<practice>Adults can think about what the future looks like for themselves and their family. Sometimes it is nice to write this down or share it with someone you trust. Adults can ask themselves, “What are my goals and how can I get there?” Break the goal down into smaller more tangible pieces and ask, “What can I accomplish in a month? Six months? A year?”Find supports that allow adults to be able to accomplish their goals. Do they need to enroll in school, create a resume, or find childcare?<reflection>What would I like to see for my family in five years? What would I like to see for my family in one year?What steps do I need to take in order to get there? What does my timeline look like?Who can be a support to me and help me accomplish each step?<keywords>child care; work; jobs; employment; goal; goal setting;
<episode>Adjusting to a New Baby<index>FAMILY WELL-BEING | 8<tagline>Take care to help baby adjust into her new role as a sibling. Give her new responsibilities and recognition with this role. Having her own amautik will allow her to care for a doll or puppy and mimic how you care for the new baby.<takeaway>With time, baby will become a proud and helpful sister.<overview>Until now baby has been the youngest child who needs the most attention. Depending on baby’s temperament and age, it can be difficult for baby now that she has to share the attention. Baby has a brand new role to take on. Being an older sibling helps baby start to develop empathy. With some preparation, having a younger sibling can be a very positive experience for her.It takes some juggling to look after everyone’s needs during this transition time for a family. Thinking through the process helps it to feel less stressful and more manageable.<practice>Parents can prepare baby early by having lots of conversations with her about what is happening. Help her gradually understand the importance of being an older sibling and all the ways she can help if she’d like. Let baby see Mom’s belly grow and feel the newborn kick. Baby may like to read a book or sing to Mom’s belly. This will help build a bond between the siblings. Give baby a doll and practice putting a diaper on it. Swaddle the doll and let baby take her for a walk or feed her a bottle. Reinforce this behavior by letting her know soon she will be a big sister and can help do these things with the new baby too. Make sure she has an amautik so that she can carry her doll while you carry the new baby. While feelings of jealousy are natural, being involved will help baby to feel proud and responsible for her new sibling.Figure out what transitions need to be made early so that baby does not experience too much change at once. You may need to make decisions about moving baby to their own bed or decide how breastfeeding is going to work. If Mom is not comfortable nursing both children, she may want to start weaning baby off the breast as soon as she knows she is pregnant so that the shift is easier for baby.Make time for baby to spend one on one time with an adult so that she can have individual attention as well. Once the newborn is home, baby will get less attention. This can be difficult for her to understand. If she knows she will read a book alone with Mom every day before bed, she will be less likely to act out to try to get attention. This can be a time when she is allowed to go off independently with Auntie or Anaanaasiaq to have some special time. Build the special relationships to support your child’s transition.<reflection>How do you feel about having a new baby?How can you gradually involve baby in conversations about her new sibling? What can she be involved with during pregnancy?What can she be involved in once the new baby has arrived?<keywords>second child; pregnant; sibling; siblings; transition; new role; family dynamic