<episode>Baby Sign<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 1<tagline>Teach baby a few simple signs, such as “bye-bye”, “more”, and “all done”.<takeaway>Signs give baby a way to communicate before she can to talk.<overview>Baby develops the ability to control her hand and body movements before she can talk and often starts to use gestures to communicate. Teaching baby a few simple signs gives her a way to talk to the people around her while her verbal language develops. Baby will stop using sign language or actions when she can say words.<practice>Adults can encourage baby to wave bye-bye. Other simple signs that baby can easily master are “eat” tapping the mouth with the fingertips,“ more” tapping the fingertips of both hands together, “all gone” holding both hands in the air and waving them and “diaper change” bringing fists together, then rotating them.Use a few simple signs to talk to baby and encourage her to use them in response. Baby may need a few moments to respond. Waiting shows that her side of the ‘conversation’ is valued.Babies will also begin to use actions to indicate what they want such as pulling an amautik over to you or putting on a hat.<reflection>How do you gesture when you speak? How does that help you to communicate?What gestures are commonly used in your home or community?Have you noticed baby using gestures, such as pointing, to tell you what she wants? How else is baby beginning to communicate?<keywords>communication; language; fine motor; asl; serve and return; narrate;
<episode>Jargon<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 2<tagline>Respond to baby’s attempts to communicate.<takeaway>Baby plays with language when she is learning to talk.<overview>Between 12 – 18 months, baby imitates the patterns of language she hears around her. She may sound like she is carrying on a conversation by stringing together nonsense words, mimicking the tone and rhythm of conversation, using eye contact, using gestures, and sometimes putting an actual word in the mix, so that it seems like she is really talking. She may sound excited, angry, sad, happy, or afraid, even if she is not actually experiencing these emotions. She is practicing sound patterns by paying attention to the characteristics of speech. Baby will mimic what she sees and hears those around her doing and try it out to check if she is understanding it correctly.<practice>Jargon is an opportunity for adults to practice serve and return. When baby uses jargon, respond by trying to interpret what she is telling you, taking cues from any words or gestures she is using. For example, baby may say, “Ooopa doopa doopa ball ooopa doopa,” while pointing towards the door. Adults might respond, “Yes, your ball is outside. Do you want to go play with it?” Adults may not understand what baby is saying, but can still respond with “Oh, that’s so interesting,” “Really? Tell me more!” or “You sound mad. What happened?” Give baby a toy telephone and enjoy having a jargon conversation with her over the phone or take the role of an action figure or doll.<reflection>How does baby communicate with you? What can you say to baby when she is talking in jargon?How do you respond if the child becomes frustrated when you don’t understand?<keywords>serve and return; language; social-emotional; conversations; communication; 
<episode>Many Ways to Describe<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 3<tagline>Use many descriptive words when talking to baby.<takeaway>When adults use descriptive words, baby develops a more complete understanding of her environment.<overview>When adults describe the things baby sees, hears, or feels, it strengthens her understanding of the world around her, and in time will help her to describe the things she experiences as well. Adding a little bit of extra information is a small task that has a big impact on baby’s vocabulary development.<practice>Baby takes in information through all of her five senses; sight, touch, sound, smell, and especially taste. Adults can think about this when they describe items to baby. Casually mentioning colour, shape, size, scent, texture, and numbers brings baby’s awareness to these details.“Those four wheels on your truck are so bumpy; can you feel the bumpy tires?” “You are colouring with an orange marker. It even smells like an orange.”“Your soup is hot; see the steam coming up? Let’s blow on it.”“Would you like a red cup or a green cup? You’d like the green cup. Green is like the grass outside. ”<reflection>How does it feel to add more detail when you are speaking to baby? Does baby have preferences in colours or textures?How can this activity help encourage baby’s appreciation of nature? Or awareness of her environment?What are the words in Inuktut that better describe what she is experiencing?<keywords>describe; narration; language; expression; literacy; syllabic; writing; tradition; vocabulary; language; details; senses;
<episode>Making Marks on Paper<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 4<tagline>Encourage baby to make marks on a large piece of paper that you have put on the floor. Talk to her about the marks she makes.<takeaway>Using crayons, markers, and other writing tools is an early stage of literacy.<overview>First “drawings” will mostly be lines and curves. Baby is starting to understand that she can make marks on paper. Later she will see that the marks can represent an object or idea. At first, baby will colour at random, but before long, her marks will have more purpose. As baby starts to control her arms, hands, and fingers, she will make deliberate marks.<practice>Offer baby a blank piece of paper and a few crayons. Talk to her about the lines she makes, and the colours she is using as you colour together. Use blank paper - baby is not yet ready to try to colour inside the lines of a colouring book. Provide examples through your own drawing. If baby says ball, draw a circle so that she sees that shape and can try to repeat it.Baby can also make marks, by drawing with a stick in the sand, running a finger through frost or fog on a window, or using a pen and pencil on paper.Adults should supervise carefully, as baby might draw on walls, floors, or any other handy surface. Watch to keep crayons, markers, and paint out of baby’s mouth. Try saying “Colour on the paper,” or “Put the crayons in the box when you are done.”<reflection>Does baby see you making lists, or using a pen and paper for other purposes? How can you gently bring baby’s attention to this?Is there opportunity for her to write on your list as well? Has baby shown interest in colouring?What can you say if baby colours on the walls or puts crayons in her mouth? What importance does art play in your culture?How can you bring baby’s awareness to the lines and shapes in art that is around her?<keywords>Art; language; self-esteem; creativity; gross; motor; development; fine; serve & return; back & forth; expression; emotion; caregiver-child; bond; expression; describe; narration; language; expression; literacy; syllabic; writing; tradition; vocabulary<episode>One Word, Many Ideas<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 5<tagline>Interpret what baby is saying and expand her ideas.<takeaway>Baby may use one word for many purposes. Acknowledging her attempts to communicate gives her confidence to speak even more.<overview>Between 12 and 24 months of age, baby’s vocabulary grows. Since she knows a limited number of words, she will often use one word to express a complete thought. "Ski-doo" might mean, "I am on the ski-doo," "Where is the ski-doo?" or "The ski-doo is fast!" Baby understands different ways a single word can be used.<practice>Adults can listen carefully to the words baby uses and try to understand what she is saying. They may need to guess what she means based on her tone of voice, gestures, or the situation. Repeating the word back to her and using it in a full sentence tells her that someone is listening and trying to understand. For example, if baby says “ski-doo” and parents understand it to mean “I am on the ski-doo”, they might respond, “yes, we are on the ski-doo. We are going to Anaanaasiaq’s house.” Baby will be encouraged to talk more when she sees that her efforts to communicate work. Baby is trying to make sense of how a word is used.Paying attention to cues in the environment can help you interpret what baby is saying. If baby is sitting with a cup of milk and smiles, then says, “imuuk,” she is probably saying she likes the milk. Caregivers can show baby they understand by saying, “Yes Meeka, you like your milk.”<reflection>What words does baby use?When can you use the words baby knows, so she hears them in different contexts? How can you expand her understanding of certain words?How can you help build onto words to complete thoughts: imuuk – imuukguaqpii?<keywords>Serve & return; communication; bond; connection; caregiver-child; receptive; expressive; language; joint attention; secure; attachment; expanding; validating; adult-child interactions;
<episode>Reading Friendly Home<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 6<tagline>Let baby see family members reading.<takeaway>When baby sees reading is a part of her family’s day, she learns that reading can be both fun and useful.<overview>Reading is an important life skill, and it is helpful for baby to develop a positive attitude about reading right from the start. Baby is aware of the people around her. She notices their likes, interests, and habits. When she sees adults reading, she understands that reading is valued. Reading includes books, magazines, and newspapers, or any other form of written communication, whether in print or online. Adults who model a love of reading promote a reading friendly home.<practice>Reading takes many forms and spending even a few minutes with a magazine or answering text messages counts. Adults can talk about what they have read, starting conversations with, “I was reading the other day about….” and point out when others are reading, “Daddy is reading his email.” Baby will see reading as a natural part of daily life.<reflection>Do adults read often in your home? Do you enjoy reading?What kinds of books did you read as a child? What did you enjoy reading about?When could reading fit into your day?<keywords>Reading; language; books; pictures; communication; learning; literacy; development; story; routine; early literacy; writing; magazines; newspapers; <episode>Saying Words Correctly<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 7<tagline>If baby mispronounces a word, repeat it back to her in a sentence rather than correcting her.<takeaway>Baby learns how to say words when she hears them in conversation.<overview>Learning to talk is a complex process. It requires control of the small muscles in the lips, tongue, and throat. Talking also requires the ability to remember which sounds to use at the right time. As baby uses more and more words, she will have own versions of familiar words, particularly words that do not fit the regular rules of language. For example, baby may say “mouses” instead of “mice.” Correct grammar and pronunciation takes time and lots of practice.<practice>Adults can use correct grammar and pronunciation when talking to baby and use “serve and return”. Listen to what baby has to say and respond, modelling the right way to use the word. Keep interactions positive and supportive. If baby says “mouses”, an adult can reply, “Yes, there are mice in this story.” In the same way you need to emphasize the very subtle differences in syllabic sounds used in Inuktut. Often Inuit play games with language to help make these distinctions. When sounds are very similar children practice responding to the appropriate sound such as the differences between “qaaqpii” and “qapi” and “qaqpii”. Developing strong listening skills with Inuktut language is part of early language training.<reflection>Have you ever tried to learn a new language? What were some of the challenges?What helped the process?Are there words your child mispronounces? How do you respond?How can you provide lots of opportunities to practice, practice, practice?<keywords>Language; serve and return; grammar; pronunciation; talking; modelling; interactions; support; games; sounds; repeat; learning; speech; development
<episode>Read the World Around You<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 8<tagline>Pointing out words in the environment helps baby develop her awareness of letters and words.<takeaway>Babies learn that words and pictures have meaning.<overview>Early experiences with print contribute to later literacy. When adults draw baby’s attention to words in her environment, they are helping her understand that printed words are all around them, and these words and pictures are a source of information. Baby then starts to look for words and pictures wherever she goes. She may start to ask what they mean as she continues trying to understand the world.<practice>Adults can look for stop signs, store names, posters/billboards, food boxes, exit signs, or any other words, pictures, or text that they can show baby as they go about their day. Point to or indicate a familiar sign in the neighborhood, or notice the words written on her shirt. When the word and picture are together, i.e. picture of strawberries on a strawberry yogurt container, help baby to notice both so she understands that they go together. Remember to keep this activity fun and follow baby’s lead. Soon she will start pointing out signs herself, asking what they say.For Inuit, it is also critical to learn the signs in the natural world and to help the child be able to read those. Notice and point out changes in weather, things in the environment, animal behaviours. Reading the real world will always be important. Encourage the child to begin to make connections in what is being seen.<reflection>What signs do you notice in your community? In your environment?Does your baby have clothing with words on it?What words or pictures can you show your child in your home? Is your baby’s name on anything in your home?How can you encourage observations skills?<keywords>literacy; language; environment; reading; observation<episode>Two Word Sentences<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 9<tagline>Repeat and expand baby’s two-word sentences.<takeaway>Repeat and expand baby’s sentences to give her new ways to express ideas.<overview>Baby shows that she understands how language works when she starts combining words into sentences. First, she will put two words together, then three, and then four. She is expressing her thoughts with more complexity, recognizing that using more words conveys more meaning. Baby will probably use active words “Daddy walk” that get the message across clearly, rather than using full grammar “Daddy is taking me for a walk.” Hearing someone else add detail to what she says helps her to gradually use more words.<practice>Baby may need extra time to find the words she wants to use to express her ideas. Adults can support her by listening patiently, letting her express herself in the best way she can, then building on what she has said. Asking questions that she can easily answer, then expanding on her answer, gives her opportunities to put words together and hear them repeated in new ways.•	“Do you want the pink blanket?”•	“Pink blanket.”•	“OK, here is your pink blanket. It is warm and fuzzy.”<reflection>Is your baby starting to use two or more words at a time? What are some words she is comfortable using?Is baby able to add chunks to words to form simple sentences? Ani—Aningjuaq – Aningjuaqtuguut. How are you building Inuktut language structures with your child?<keywords>adult-child interactions; positive guidance; responding; language; communication
<episode>Pointing in Books<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 10<tagline>Take turns pointing to items in a book and naming them.<takeaway>When baby and adults are paying attention to one item at the same time, baby is able to absorb a large amount of information.<overview>Reading with baby can be a positive and enjoyable experience. When adults offer many opportunities for baby to be involved in the book, she is learning a lot as well. She hears adults labelling items she may not have noticed before, and she gets to share what she already knows. This solidifies her understanding of the words.Reading together in this style allows baby to hear many words. This helps her understand more and more. The more words she understands (her receptive vocabulary,) the more words she will start to use (her expressive vocabulary.) This improves her language skills. With strong language skills, baby can communicate her wants and needs, get along more successfully with other children, enjoy and do better in school. While she may not be involved in activities like this yet, in her early years she learns the skills to be able to accomplish these tasks later on.<practice>Adults have been working towards building a literacy rich environment for baby since birth by communicating actively, reading books to her, bringing her attention to print, and drawing together. Now, adults can work towards baby’s involvement in print materials such as books.Choose books that are exciting to baby, that baby shows a preference for and that relate to her life. When she sees that you are enthusiastic, she will feel excited to be involved. Adults may begin by pointing out pictures in the book. “Here’s an eagle on this page. Can you touch the eagle too?” It helps when adults show excitement and give positive feedback when baby responds. This will encourage her to continue participating.Later, ask baby questions about the book to encourage her to think about it. Then, point to the answer. For example, “Can you show me something the baby needs when she goes to bed?”<reflection>When throughout the day can you point to items other than books and talk about them? Are there particular items baby is interested in?Where are opportunities to talk about them more often? How can you further baby's understanding of those items?How can you create opportunities to link the new vocabulary and information to real world experiences?<keywords>Toddler; reading; age-appropriate; picture; book; problem solving; language; fine; motor; development; repitition; story; telling; interactive;  talk; sing; pages; personal; story; routine; books; learning; see; show; say; early literacy