<episode>Head to Toes<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 1<tagline>Baby learns about the parts of her body by naming and touching them.<takeaway>Baby will become more aware of herself as she learns the names of her body parts.<overview>Learning about her body helps baby learn about the characteristics that make her an individual and helps her see how she is similar to others. Learning about her body strengthens her identity.<practice>Throughout the day, touch parts of baby’s body and name them for her; encourage her to touch that body part of yours as well. “I’m going to wipe your cheeks and your chin.” “It’s cold outside! Feel how cold my cheeks are.” Read books like Hand, Hand, Fingers, Thumb by Dr. Seuss, and sing songs like Head and Shoulders Knees and Toes that help her identify body parts, as well. Use the Inuktut chants that teach body parts.Eventually ask baby to find the parts of her body on her own. Hand her a cloth and say, “Can you wipe your cheeks please?” Give her time to think it through to see if she understands where her cheeks are.<reflection>Which body parts do you already talk about regularly with your baby? How can you casually teach her about body parts while narrating what you are doing?How can you take what baby already knows and challenge her a little bit?<keywords>Body parts; tradition; culture; language<episode>Imitation<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 2<tagline>Give baby toys that let her play through what she sees people do.<takeaway>Baby notices what people around her are doing and starts to imitate and mimic their actions and words during play.<overview>Between 12-18 months, baby starts to engage in pretend play. Adults may notice that baby’s play is simply imitating what she has seen people do around her. She pretends to talk on the phone, take the dog for a walk, or stir a pot on the stove. Baby is using the memory of what she has seen to direct her play.<practice>While cooking dinner, offer baby a pot and a spoon to play with at the same time. When baby has safe, real life objects to play with it encourages her to be involved in this type of play. If you are sewing, provide materials for baby to play with as well.Join in with baby when she is pretending. Pick up a banana and pretend it is a phone or offer her a blanket when she is rocking her dolly. When she puts out a cup, say, “Can I have some tea?” Talk about what she is doing. “Mmmm, you are cooking supper, it smells so good,” and offer her toys or other household items that she can use while she is pretending, “Here is a cookbook to look at while you are cooking.”Talk out loud about what you are doing; this helps her notice some potential play ideas. “I’m going to drive the car, I need to turn the key to make the car go.” “These dishes need to go in the cupboard.” Baby may also be interested in acting out what she sees in her favourite books and stories.<reflection>Have you noticed baby starting to pretend? What do you see baby pretending to do? What do you hear her saying?What can you do to encourage pretend play? Are you comfortable playing pretend with her?<keywords>Age-appropriate; toys; play; senses; scientist; discovery; problem solving; books; imagination; birth- 3 years; child development; support; creativity; Pretend; play; social; competence; empathy; perspective taking; creativity; attention; problem solving; uninterrupted; open-ended; scaffold; enhance; emotion; cognitive<episode>Begin to Climb and Slide<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 3<tagline>Provide opportunity for baby to practice moving her whole body.<takeaway>Baby gains strength and confidence when she engages in active play.<overview>Shortly after baby starts walking, she will become curious about all the other things her body can do. Baby is gaining more and more control over her body. She wants to practise her new skills as often as possible. Once baby starts climbing furniture around the house, she is showing that she is ready to build strength in the big muscles in her body. This is a good example of how baby’s behaviour is letting you know what she needs. Baby needs to use her arms to pull her body up, her legs to move her body around, and is enjoying the thrill of trying a new skill and mastering it.<practice>Find ways to set up opportunities for baby to climb and slide. Visit a nearby playground and encourage her to try the slide and climbing structure. Lean the couch cushions against the couch so she can slide down to the floor. Allow baby to go up and down the stairs; she may not be interested in what is at the top or the bottom. She just needs to climb.Talk about what baby is doing “You are climbing so high." Instead of restricting movement or promoting caution, “Be careful you will fall,” help her pay attention to where she is and what she is doing. “You are getting high. How will you come down?” Guide her to climb safely so she becomes confident in her body movements. “There is a rung just below your foot. Can you reach it?”<reflection>What was the most exciting play you were involved in as a child? Why was it so exciting?Do you remember playing rough with your siblings or other children when you were a child? How did it make you feel?Did the play ever go too far, and someone got hurt? How did you and the children involved react?What signs tell you that baby is ready for more active play? Are there activities that baby enjoys that make you nervous? What do you think she enjoys about this play?How can you encourage this play in a safe way that makes both you and baby happy?<keywords>Be careful; awareness; notice; do you see; try moving; try using your; can you hear; do you feel; are you feeling; problem solve; questions; directed; scaffolding; safety; support<episode>Exploring Outdoors<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 4<tagline>Provide baby with opportunity to explore the outdoors and learn how to respect the environment.<takeaway>When children have opportunities to play in nature they gain an appreciation and investment in the land/avattimik kamatiarniq.<overview>Being outdoors relieves stress and makes adults and baby feel calmer. When baby has lots of time outdoors, her physical development will improve, and she will have a healthier immune system.Baby will gain a respect for nature when adults model how to appropriately interact with the land. Harvesting and fishing are examples of how the earth cares for our needs, and so we need to care for her too. Share the cultural teaching about how to respect animals and the environment.<practice>An adult can simply spend quality time with baby outdoors. This will strike baby’s natural curiosity. Show baby something new by asking her questions and explain the things that she is curious about. This is a time to teach keen observation of what is happening around her. Adults may choose to provide baby with tools that can help her to explore the outdoors. Some examples are buckets, shovels, jars, magnifying glass, and nets. Harvesting, fishing, bonfires, picking berries or tea leaves, and sliding are all examples of exciting events to plan out and do with baby. More simple activities close to home could be going for walks, digging in a snowdrift, playing with a ball outside, having a picnic, or building a tent on the deck. Many activities that can be done inside can be brought outdoors too. Colouring, books, blocks, dolls, and cars are all examples of typical indoor activities that are equally fun when played outside. When baby is dressed appropriately for the weather, she will be more comfortable and want to spend more time outside. When spending time outdoors is a fun and exciting time, adults will find that baby will prefer it to being inside or watching TV.<reflection>What are things that you like to do outdoors? Do you remember playing outside as a child?What did you play with?Who was with you?What are some teachings you know about taking care of the land? How can you share them with baby?What are some traditional activities that you and baby can take part in outdoors? Who can you talk to for some ideas?How can you bring the outdoors in when it is too cold to be outside?What are some traditional activities that you and baby can take part in outdoors? Who can you talk to for some ideas?How can you bring the outdoors in when it is too cold to be outside?<keywords>Napping; outdoors; environment; nature; exploring; Land; life; wonder; discovery; tradition; culture; community; water; respect; Mother Earth; care; nurturing; modelling; garden; relationships; sensory; hearing; seeing; smell; touch; fresh air; Health; sleep; nature; fresh air; tradition; well-being; Health; nature; Mother Earth; mind; body; spirit; senses; balance; connection; Land; relationship; outdoors in; tradition; culture; development; Nature; connection; Mother Earth; mind; body; spirit; heart<episode>Counting Together<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 5<tagline>Count out loud with baby.<takeaway>Baby will hear numbers used in sequence which will help her learn to count.<overview>The first step to learning to count is hearing and remembering the order of numbers. Later, baby will start to match 1 with one item, or 2 with two items. At this point, saying the numbers out loud is enough. Adults can find fun ways to count with baby throughout the day.<practice>The more baby hears and uses numbers the more she will understand them and find them helpful. Adults can count baby’s fingers and toes in the bath or count how many pieces of apple she has.When going down the slide adults can help baby get ready by saying, “One, two, three!” Then adults can prompt baby by saying, “Help me count, okay? Ready, one, two…” and let her fill in the blanks.There will be a time when baby says numbers out of order or pronounces them incorrectly. Encourage her participation in a positive way. She is showing that she knows a number goes there, and with enough practice she will have the right number in place. If adults laugh or make baby feel silly about mixing it up, she may stop trying.<reflection>When is counting helpful for you? How can you bring baby’s attention to this?When in the day do you find time to count with baby?What are the words for numbers 1-10 in Inuktut? Find books and songs that help teach these.<keywords>Counting; culture; narrate; describe;communication; comprehension; expressive; language development
<episode>Animal Sounds<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 6<tagline>Talk about animals and the sounds they make, their habits and how to be respectful of them.<takeaway>Baby learns about animals and the natural world while playing with common sounds found in everyday language and learning expectations for respecting the natural world.<overview>Animals appeal to baby. Whether they are real animals or toys, pictures or cartoons, many children are curious about the role of animals in their lives. Some researchers believe that interacting with animals helps children develop empathy and compassion, and that learning about animals from a young age connects children to nature. It is important to make sure baby has early exposure to connect the harvesting of animals to the food she is eating and the clothing she may be wearing. For Inuit animals gave up their souls so that Inuit could survive, creating a very essential bond between them. Keenly observing and being in tune with the nature and habits of each animal was learned at very early ages.<practice>Toys and books offer many opportunities to talk about animals and the sounds they make. As adults play or read with baby, they can look for naturally occurring moments to point these out, saying things like “Look at the puppy. Ruff ruff ruff.” Adults can also draw baby’s attention to animals in the home, on TV, or in the community, helping them see that animals come in many shapes, sizes, and environments. Talk especially about the animals on which Inuit rely to survive and try to expose baby to experiences when animals are harvested and food or clothing prepared from them.<reflection>Do you have any pets? How does baby respond to your pets?What animal toys does baby have? Does baby notice animals in books?Where else might you see animals in your community?What do you know about cultural teachings about how animals are respected, harvested, prepared and used?<keywords>See, show, say; mother-child; book; serve & return; communication; literacy; language; development<episode>Search and Find<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 7<tagline>Encourage baby to use her whole body to look for something.<takeaway>Baby can move around when looking for something, adding more excitement to search and find games.<overview>Baby enjoys solving problems, such as finding a missing object or person. With her new motor skills, baby can search more widely, opening up new possibilities. Adults can give baby opportunities to look for toys or can play hide and seek with baby.<practice>Find a space where baby has lots of room to move and explore safely. Place baby’s favourite toy inside a box. Cover the box with a blanket and say "Goodbye." Then take the blanket off and say "Hello." Do it again. You may leave a piece of the toy sticking out from under the blanket at first as a cue, then as baby gains confidence in the game, cover the toy completely.Baby loves to search for people as well. You might run around a corner and call out to baby to come and find you. Give her lots of praise when she does.<reflection>How does baby react when she accomplishes something by herself? How do you feel when she is successful?What can you say or do to communicate your feelings to her? How can you make this activity easier or harder for her?<keywords>Exploration; problem-solving; hide-and-seek; movement; body; confidence; object-permanence<episode>Sink and Float<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 8<tagline>Give baby a bucket of water and some toys. Let her experiment with which ones sink, and which ones float.<takeaway>Sink and float games allows baby to practise solving problems through experimenting.<overview>Sink and float is an early science concept. Baby learns about weight when she sees which objects are heavy enough to sink to the bottom of her bucket. She learns that some objects are light and will stay at the surface. She begins to understand that differences in weight cause different effects on objects.<practice>Fill up a large tub of water or play in the bathtub and offer baby various objects; cups, ladles, rubber duck, smooth rocks, toy cars, and boats. Show baby how some items float and some items sink. Pull the rubber duck down to the bottom of the tub and let it pop back up. Show enthusiasm and excitement, saying, “Pop! That floated all the way up to the top! Can you try?” Encourage her to try a new item, “Does your toy car float to the top? Wow! Your car went all the way down to the bottom. Does anything else sink to the bottom?”<reflection>How can you make sure baby is safe while playing in water? What are some teachings you know about water?Other than in the bath, when else does baby have opportunity to play in water?<keywords>Observation; changes; water; sink; float; problem-solving; experiment; <episode>Building<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 9<tagline>Offer baby materials to build and play with.<takeaway>Baby will use her hand and fingers to build and stack small objects.<overview>Baby practices small or fine motor skills when she builds with blocks or other household objects. She learns about size, weight, balance, and stability, especially when adults talk about the blocks while baby is playing.Baby practises using trial and error when she plays with the objects. For example, if her tower falls down, baby tries again, perhaps using a different strategy.<practice>Provide baby with objects in a variety of sizes and shapes; baby can line them up in a row, stack them on top of each other or knock them over. Using descriptive words, show her how to stack them, and encourage baby to try. “I’m putting the blue one on top of this big yellow block. Can you put this red one on top?” Provide baby with many other items to build with, such as empty boxes, or plastic containers, measuring scoops, empty cans without sharp edges.<reflection>What are some fun and safe open-ended materials you can offer baby to build with? Baby could play alone, or she could play with you while you talk about what you are both doing.What is the difference between these two activities?What are some new words/ideas you can introduce during this activity?<keywords>Stacking; blocks; mirroring; scaffolding; motor; play; creative; sensory; child; development<episode>Nesting<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 10<tagline>Let baby experiment with how items fit together.<takeaway>Baby uses hand-eye coordination and problem-solving skills to fit objects together.<overview>Exploring how shapes fit inside of each other is a simple and early math skill that is also like a puzzle. Baby practices problem-solving strategies, develops the small muscles in her hand, and hand-eye coordination. This activity increases her awareness of spaces. She has to look at a piece, judge its size and shape, decide where it should go, and make it fit in. This simple activity provides baby with opportunity to combine many skills at the same time.<practice>Adults may offer a nesting toy to baby with all the objects placed inside and see how she takes them out and explores them. Describe to her the shapes she is holding, “You're holding an apple, that apple is round.” Adults do not have to give her the correct action or even expect her to get it on the first try. Offer her the idea so that she can make the connection on her own, “That cup is round and this muffin tin is round.”This activity can be done using items around the home - pots and pans, tupperware, cups or muffin tins. Gather a muffin pan and various round objects such as an apple, a ball, and a cup. As baby gets better at this activity, adults may offer her containers with their corresponding lids. Describe the various shapes and narrate her actions.Adults might use words like round, square, big, and little.<reflection>What is already in your home that you could use as a puzzle? What are some examples of other math skills that baby uses?How can math be involved in baby’s play?How can you bring baby’s attention to math concepts that occur in everyday life?<keywords>Nesting; experiment; containers; labelling; big; small; round; household items; math; development; problem-solving; puzzle<episode>Action Words<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 11<tagline>Use words to describe baby’s movements.<takeaway>Putting language to baby’s actions helps her become more aware of her own body.<overview>The more language baby hears, the more she understands and the better she will be at communicating as she gets older. Any type of play—including active play—can be a good opportunity to engage language. As adults describe what baby is doing, baby becomes more aware of her body. This helps her to understand what she is able to do. Describing baby’s actions can also help her to become more aware of her successes. When baby makes a movement and hears the words that describes it at the same time, baby gains a deeper understanding of what that word means.<practice>As baby plays and moves her body, observe what she is doing. Adults can think of a word that describes the action. Some examples could be, run, hop, jump, pull, push, tip toe, crawl, or skip. Say the word to her as she is moving, “You’re crawling so fast!”In everyday situations, describe how baby is moving or give her clearer guidance. For example, “Let’s tiptoe to your room so we don’t wake up your sister. Tip... toe... tip…. toe.” Using descriptive words can offer baby specific positive feedback on how she is growing, “Last week you were jumping with one foot and you just used two feet to jump! Can you jump all the way over to me? Jump, jump, jump!”<reflection>How does it feel to repeat action words to baby? How can you say it in a silly way so that both of you are laughing?When can you bring baby’s attention to how others are moving?How can you label your own actions as you are doing them so that baby notices?<keywords>physical; language; congitive; awareness;
<episode>What’s That Sound?<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 12<tagline>Point out and name sounds that occur throughout the day.<takeaway>Baby becomes curious and more aware of her surroundings when adults talk about the sounds she hears.<overview>Connecting sounds with words requires baby to use her memory to identify something that is not directly in front of her. This is a good way to encourage baby to be present in nature. Listening takes time and deep thought. It also takes practise to become good at it. Intentionally listening to something does not come easily because baby has to stop what she is doing and wait for a sound. Waiting for something to happen is practising delayed gratification—baby learns that results do not always happen right away. This skill is important for later learning as well as social skills.<practice>While on a walk, stop and point out a sound. Adults may cup their hand around their ear to signify to baby that they are using their ears to hear. Adults can point it out by saying, “I hear a bird, listen! Tweet, tweet, tweet, do you hear it too? Where is that bird?” Connect the sound with a real object when possible. Later, challenge baby to see if she can name a sound that you draw her attention to. Pay attention to the difference in sounds that different kinds of dogs or geese might make. Use the correct names for these animals.<reflection>What sounds do you hear regularly around your community? In your home?How do you use body language to show baby something she can't see so both of you can pay attention to it?<keywords>labelling; language; joint attention; senses; nature; nature play<episode>Matching<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 13<tagline>Bring awareness to two objects that are exactly alike.<takeaway>Matching helps baby to recognize similarities and differences.<overview>Matching involves identifying two objects that are the same. When baby explores her environment, she naturally notices how things are alike, and how they are different. Baby begins matching objects that have the same characteristics<practice>Set up situations where baby can match an item to another one that is the same. While doing laundry, give baby 3 socks; two that match, and one that looks very different. Talk to her about matching the socks “See, this one has a red stripe, and this one does too. They match. This one is all yellow, it doesn’t match.”Using a Memory game, or any other type of game that has clear differences between cards, place a few cards face up and ask baby to find the ones that are the same; start small, with only two or three pairs, then increase the challenge when baby is ready. Focus on saying the words same and different. This is also a good way to begin teaching a child to recognize syllabic symbols that are same or different and the sounds that each one makes.<reflection>What objects can you give baby to match? Which items around the house come in matching pairs?When can you use the words same and different throughout the day?<keywords>nature play; concepts; cognitive; memory; blocks;<episode>Sorting<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 14<tagline>Help baby to recognize how groups can be formed.<takeaway>Sorting helps baby to notice similarities among many items and builds the idea of grouping.<overview>Sorting involves grouping similar objects together. Baby may begin to sort objects based on what she likes or what she is familiar with. She will begin to sort them by characteristics, such as colour, size, shape, texture and sound. Sorting items deepens baby’s understanding of relationships, patterns, and classification.<practice>Watch closely for when baby begins to group objects on her own; adults can watch to see if she separates peas from carrots on her dinner plate or puts stuffed animals on one side of her bed, and dolls on another side. This lets adults know she is already recognizing similarities and differences. Adults can give her lots of chances to practise her grouping skills in daily routines. When cleaning up toys, help baby sort by talking about where each toy belongs. “Blocks belong in this tub, and doll clothes go in this basket.” When adults are putting dishes away, let baby help put away the cutlery.While adults are reading a book, they may ask baby to show them all the dogs, or all the red balloons, or any other category that they notice in the book. Put out a red plate and a blue plate, with a variety of red and blue objects nearby, and ask baby where the objects should go.<reflection>What objects can your baby sort?Do you have toys or objects around your home that baby can sort into groups? How do you use classification and sorting in your daily life?<keywords>Play; literacy; numeracy; shape; recognition; comparison; repitition; sensory; foundation; matching; grouping; sequence; measuring
<episode>What’s Inside?<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 15<tagline>Ask baby to reach into a box that has different objects inside. Ask her to find a specific texture.<takeaway>Baby can connect the names of different textures to what she is feeling.<overview>Baby explores her environment by touching. Putting words to the textures she feels gives her a deeper understanding of the world around her. Baby may begin to group textures and form preferences or opinions based on the characteristics of different items.<practice>Choose two or three objects that feel very different from one another and can be described by a simple word. A cotton ball is soft, a rock is hard, and caribou moss is crunchy. Offer them to baby one at a time, “This is caribou moss, it feels so crunchy!” Give baby time to explore each one using words to describe what she is doing and feeling.Once she is familiar with the items, turn the exploration into a game. Let baby see each item and label it again for her. Then place the items into a bag or a box so she cannot see them. Ask her, “Can you find something that is crunchy?” Have her reach into the bag. Whichever item she pulls out stay positive and encouraging, “You found the rock, the rock is hard. Do you remember which one was crunchy?”Eventually try using those descriptive words in other contexts, “You’re walking through all that sand on the beach, how does it feel? What sound are you making? That’s right it is so crunchy. Crunch, crunch, crunch!” Try providing different kinds of furs and getting baby to identify which animal each kind comes from. It’s important for baby to know that fur is an important material for Inuit to use.<reflection>How does baby react when she finds the correct item?How can you continue encouraging her even when she chooses an item that you did not ask for? When else can you describe how items feel?Are there books that support this activity? Where can you find some?<keywords>Touch; feeling; describe; identify; language; words; exploration; textures<episode>Throwing and Catching<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 16<tagline>Play a simple game of catch with a ball that is easy for baby to hold.<takeaway>A simple game of catch is a way to practise taking turns and to develop muscle control.<overview>Throwing and catching only works when you have a partner. Baby needs to trust that when she throws the ball, the other person will throw it back. Baby needs to give and take for the game to be successful and fun.<practice>Start with a large soft ball, and stand a short distance away from baby. Show her the ball and let her know what you will do, “Can you see the ball, Panik? I’m going to throw it to you. You got it!” Expect this to take some time and practice before baby understands that it will come back. Gently encourage her to throw it back. Repeat this activity, enthusiastically cheering her on when she is successful. Encourage her to use both overhand and underhand and to watch which is a more accurate way to throw right now.If this is too difficult and baby becomes discouraged, adults can make it easier by sitting on the floor and rolling it back-and-forth at first. When baby masters rolling, adults can work up to bouncing the ball gently to her. As baby becomes more capable, start to stand further back, using smaller balls. This is a skill that will develop gradually, over several years, so go slowly and have fun with this activity.Once baby is comfortable with moving the ball around, you may introduce throwing the ball up and catching it. This is the first step to learning how to juggle multiple objects.<reflection>When does baby play with other children her age? Why is it important that baby learn to be part of a group?When you watch baby play with other children, how does she communicate with them? Encourage a sequenced pattern so that every child gets a turn to throw and catch.In what other ways can you encourage cooperation?What are some fun activities for baby to be involved in with other children?<keywords>physical; social-emotional; outdoors; active; play; sharing; cooperation<episode>More and Less<index>MEANINGFUL MOMENTS | 17<tagline>Compare amounts by labelling them as more or less.<takeaway>Talking about how many items there are increases baby’s awareness of math concepts.<overview>Some children are gifted in using and understanding numbers and others will need some support. These differences are not noticeable until later in their childhood. Talking about math concepts early in her life encourages baby to think about numbers. It also helps her make sense of those skills in a way that will help her learning throughout her life.<practice>Adults can focus on using the words more and less, bigger and smaller, throughout the day. Adults are already familiar with saying number words out loud to baby. They have also practised counting with baby. This will build on those activities.Getting baby involved is the best way for her to learn. Adults may ask, “I only have one baby wipe, can you pass me one more baby wipe? Thank you, now I have two baby wipes!” This helps baby understand that two is more than one. While cleaning up, say, “If we both pick up the toys, there will be less work to do.”Anytime adults and baby are playing with two or more items at once there is good opportunity for this activity. Try building two tall towers of blocks. Adults can count the blocks with baby and then ask, “Which tower has less blocks. Which one is bigger (or taller)?” Adults can hold two clear cups of water while playing in the bath and then ask baby, “Can you show me which one has less water?” It takes time for baby to learn new words, so respond positively when she makes a mistake, “My tower just has three blocks, but your tower has five! My tower has less blocks. Use more and less often and in many different ways. In a few weeks, baby will understand what these words mean.<reflection>When you first start using these new words how does baby respond? Does she respond at all?How can you use your tone of voice to better explain the meaning of more or less and other comparative terms? Use a small voice to say mikitukuluk and a big voice to say angijutjuaq.When you ask baby to show you something, how does she answer? Does the way she answer change over time?<keywords>Milestones; literacy; numeracy; cognitive; development; child; development; newborn- 6 years; age-appropriate; math; foundation