<episode>Breastfeeding Connection<index>NURTURING CARE | 1<tagline>Try to breastfeed baby. Breastfeeding protects your baby’s health.<takeaway>Breastfeeding is an opportunity for skin-to-skin contact, which is one way to build a strong bond between mother and baby.<overview>Skin-to-skin contact immediately after birth provides tactile stimulation that releases hormones. This encourages brain development. Skin-to-skin contact stimulates baby to look for the mother’s breast and can promote more successful breastfeeding.<practice>Breastfeeding is a good opportunity to practice skin-to-skin contact. It promotes bonding between mother and baby, helping to establish a nurturing, caring relationship. Newborns who are held directly against their mother’s body cry less, sleep longer, and experience physical gains (better body temperature regulation, better blood sugar stability) for months following birth. Adults can try skin-to-skin contact when baby is having trouble settling. The amautik is an important way to increase this kind of contact. Breastfeeding, depending upon your breastfeeding frequency and other factors, is a method of birth control that can be more than 98% effective during the first 6 months and 94% effective during the second six months. Ensuring that all of baby’s sucking needs are met at the breast increases the effectiveness of this method of contraception. Breastfeeding should be exclusive, not introducing other sucking replacements such as nipples or pacifiers.<reflection>How do you feel while breastfeeding baby? How does baby feel before, during, and after breastfeeding? How can you include language during this special time together? Was this a natural part of parenting in your home?Do you carry baby inside the house in order to stay close while you are doing other things?<keywords>Skin-to-skin; nurturing; bonding; mother-child; parent-child; eye contact; senses; affection; touch; stress; 0-5 weeks; Breastfeeding; milk; engorgement; blocked; ducts; colostrum; formula; night feedings; mother-child; bond; nutrition<episode>A Feeling of Trust <index>NURTURING CARE | 2<tagline>Use gentle hands and a kind voice when carrying out baby’s daily routines.<takeaway>A steady source of comfort makes baby feel safe and secure. It builds a feeling of trust.<overview>In the first year of life, baby is very vulnerable. Baby depends completely on others to take care of her. When adults provide baby with nurturing care, baby develops a sense of trust in the adults around her. This begins to lay the groundwork for the way baby will approach new situations and people. Developing a sense of trust in the first year of life results in a generally optimistic belief about the world. Daily routines are opportunities to cuddle and comfort babies, letting them know that they can trust that their needs will be met.<practice>Babies are comforted when they are held close and can hear someone’s heartbeat. At around 6 weeks old, when adults cuddle, rock, and talk softly, babies start to respond by watching, snuggling or smiling. These are all signs of baby's trust. Inuit parents and communities see themselves as responsible for the spirit of the child. Babies’ and young children’s needs should be met immediately and babies should be comforted when they cry. Everyone is responsible for watching over the children in the community and teaching them about the world they live in. Trusting relationships are the foundation of family.<reflection>As a child, who were the people you knew you could trust? Were they family members or family friends?What about these people made you feel safe?How can you mimic those qualities for your own child? Who can you trust today in your adult life?Will they take part in your child-raising community?What relational networks does your child have through naming, kinship, special affiliations?<keywords>Secure; attachment; oxytocin; joy; safe; feelings; emotions; name it; affection; love; eye contact; spoil; mistakes; self-worth; self-regulate; guidance; protection; bigger; stronger; wiser; kind; trust; Secure; attachment; exploration; support; safety; protect; comfort; self-regulate; emotions; needs; responsible; guidance; protection; bigger; stronger; wiser; kind; trust; Behaviour; attention; connection; communication; secure; base; attachment; control; rewards; unconditional; love; safety; nurturing; connection; self-regulate<episode>Recognize and Respond<index>NURTURING CARE | 3<tagline>Watch for baby’s eye contact, movement, and sounds. Think about what she is telling you and respond.<takeaway>When adults pay attention to baby’s attempts to communicate, baby knows someone is there for her.<overview>Newborns learn to regulate their eating and sleeping. Consistent, responsive soothing helps baby to feel content, safe, and secure.<practice>One of the most important tasks for adults in the first few months of baby’s life is to help her feel comfortable in her new world. Baby sends signals to adults to let them know what she needs or wants. These signals might include eye contact, smiling, wiggling, reaching out, or crying. These non-verbal signals are the beginnings of conversations. When adults respond promptly, baby starts to understand the benefits of looking for help. Baby does not have the maturity yet to manage her own emotions. But when adults respond to her and guide her, she starts to learn skills she will need to soothe herself. EY Visitors can encourage parents to be aware of their baby’s signals and their own responses.<reflection>How do you react to baby’s cues?How can you make sure that you respond positively to baby’s various expressions of emotion? What calms you when you’re feeling upset?How does baby respond when you try these things? How does baby communicate with you?
<keywords>Autonomy; supervision; feelings; temperament; distress; responsive; nurturing; identify; emotion; expression; self-regulate; patience; kindness; love; Self-regulation; stress; emotion; responsiveness; nurturing; serve & return; hovering; helicopter; overbearing; over-responsiveness; sensitive; communication; signals; wants; needs; balance; Self-regulation; stress; emotion; calm; alert; happy; inhibition; arousal; activation; Communication; responsiveness; over-responsiveness; eye contact; avoidance; ignore; signals; wants; balance; sensitive; autonomy; parent-child; cues; serve and return
<episode>Stimulate <index>NURTURING CARE | 4<tagline>Early observation is critically important to baby’s development. Continually stimulate baby's senses of hearing, seeing, touching, smelling, tasting.<takeaway>Baby will become more aware of her environment and begin to carefully observe things that are going on.<overview>Becoming keenly observant of the things around help her baby develop appropriate responses to new conditions and to understand the connections between people and things.<practice>From a very young age, baby should continually be encouraged to develop a keen awareness of everything around. This includes what is in the immediate environment and also what is in the natural world. In order to be able to successfully respond to changes and challenges, Inuit were conditioned to be hyper-aware of all their surroundings and the inter-connections between things. Spend time with baby out in nature and create opportunities to explore the things that can be observed. Use accurate terminology and encourage baby to experience as much as possible through sight, touch, taste, smell and feel. Expose baby to cause and effect sentences such as “Night is coming so it will become cold soon” or “Those birds are flying high because they are headed a long way.”<reflection>How do you encourage baby to become aware of the things around her? How are you creating opportunities for baby to learn about the natural world?How can you stimulate baby to use sight, taste, touch, smell and feel to better understand things around her? How can you encourage curiosity in your child?
<keywords>Stimulate; awareness; environment; senses; touch; taste; smell; sight; sounds; observation; 
<episode>Diapering<index>NURTURING CARE | 5<tagline>Ask: “Haahaapii?” when a baby is squirming and might need to pee and also after the baby has peed. This prepares the baby to be potty trained.Talk, sing, or play during diaper changes.<takeaway>Make your child aware of the need for peeing. Diaper changing is a predictable part of baby’s day. Positive interactions during these times will help make the routine an enjoyable experience.<overview>Diapering routines happen several times every day and are opportunities for one-on-one talk time with baby. Diapering is a time when baby may feel vulnerable or uncomfortable. Create a routine by changing a diaper just before feeding so that baby is comfortable and ready to feed and then can fall asleep without being disturbed later. When diapering routines become daily care rituals with predictable patterns, baby is more likely to be relaxed and content.<practice>Inuit try to anticipate when a child needs to relieve herself. This can be done by noticing the behaviours of the baby. Repeatedly the baby will be asked, “Haahaapii?” and the diaper will be removed, and the child held securely over a potty or the diaper itself, so the child controls the process. A caring, responsive adult will encourage baby with a soft tone and repeat conversations, rhymes, and songs to comfort while waiting for her to relieve herself. This promotes a trusting relationship and helps baby learn to anticipate, building her ability to self-regulate before any change or discomfort. Over time, baby will begin to internalize the feelings of safety and predictability that occur while being changed. This will create a positive, personal experience to be shared. It also helps to result in early potty training. Inuit children who are trained this way are often trained by 9-12 months.<reflection>Who are the primary caregivers in baby’s life that will help with baby’s care? What are opportunities to build routines and to interact, play or be silly during diapering?Which parts of diapering can baby be involved in?Which diapering supplies are safe for baby to hold or explore? What concepts can you talk about during this time?<keywords>Diaper; change; communication; bond; narration; eye contact; serve & return; nurturing; development; responsiveness; mother-child; language; sequence; teamwork; cues<episode>Understanding Cues<index>NURTURING CARE | 6<tagline>Listen to baby to figure out what her cries mean and try to soothe her.<takeaway>By paying attention to her different cries, adults can be ready to help baby with exactly what she needs.<overview>Crying is a distress cue that baby sends when she is hungry, sick, hurt, scared, overtired, too hot or too cold, afraid, or lonely. Being close to her mother is familiar to baby, since she was a part of her mom for 9 months. Holding baby close can be a great comfort when she is distressed. Once adults get to know how baby cries differently for different things, they can console her by identifying what she wants even before they can help satisfy her need. Sometimes babies experience colic which results in persistent crying which may seem not to have any obvious cause. Discuss how to address colic with the nurses.<practice>Adults who pay attention to baby’s signals help her to learn that “talking” is powerful long before she starts to use words. Things to try when baby is crying:•	Check to see if baby is too warm or not warm enough.•	Check to see if baby’s diaper needs to be changed.•	Baby may be hungry—try breastfeeding.•	Burp baby.•	Wrap baby comfortably in a blanket, hold her close, rock her and make soft sounds like “shh” over and over or hum softly.•	Try skin-to-skin contact.•	Check gums for teething pain.<reflection>What do you know about baby’s crying? What is common practice in your home or family?How does baby’s crying make you feel? What is baby’s routine?Does baby wake up to eat, or does she eat and then want to sleep right after? What is your immediate instinct when baby cries?The mother is the expert in what her baby needs. Build her up to feel like it. Is there anything else baby does to tell you what she needs?What soothes baby?
<keywords>Understanding; cues; crying; routine; mother-child; parent-child; soothing; communication; hungry, cold, tired, happy, responsive; <episode>Baby Massage<index>NURTURING CARE | 7<tagline>Gently stroke baby’s body.<takeaway>Massages promote bonding and baby’s sense of touch. They also reduce baby’s stress.<overview>High levels of stress can cause damage to baby’s developing brain. Massage decreases levels of the stress hormone cortisol and increases levels of the two “feel good” hormones, serotonin and dopamine. Serotonin helps balance mood, sleep patterns, appetite, and pain awareness. Dopamine helps develop brain functions, including memory, attention, and problem- solving. Massage can also help baby through painful times, such as teething.<practice>Parents can massage baby, starting with her legs and feet, gently loosening joints. Move to the middle and stroke baby’s chest, tummy, shoulders, and arms. Finish with gentle finger strokes on baby’s head, around the eyes and the cheeks.<reflection>How can you prepare yourself, baby, and the environment for a relaxing experience? When is a good time of the day for baby's massage?What are baby’s reactions to the massage? How does baby respond to touch?<keywords>Baby; massage; touch; senses; affection; touch; physical; psycho-social; attachment; safety; nurturing; care; love; Baby; massage; touch; senses; affection; touch; physical; psycho-social; attachment; safety; nurturing; care; love; stimulation; bond; mother-child; caregiver-child; sleep; coordination; cortisol; nervous system; weight <episode>Baby Mouths<index>NURTURING CARE | 8<tagline>Build in oral hygiene practices with baby as a daily routine.<takeaway>Early oral hygiene practices will help baby get used to taking care of her teeth. This promotes language development and overall health.<overview>Implementing a teeth cleaning routine from birth will ensure baby is used to the habit whenever her teeth do come in. Between the ages of 6 and 8 months, baby will likely get her first tooth, but some babies will get a tooth earlier. It is important to care for her teeth right from the start. Any tooth extractions in early childhood could affect language development and the health of secondary teeth as well.<practice>Always clean your infant's gums after feeding. Try wrapping a moistened washcloth around the index finger of your free hand and gently massage the gum tissues. Once a tooth comes in, start to use a child's soft toothbrush, without toothpaste, in addition to massaging the gums. To ease the irritation of teething, give your infant a clean teething ring or a cold wet washcloth. Cold temperatures are soothing. Dental decay is an infectious disease. Without meaning to, adults can spread the bacteria that cause tooth decay to baby. Parents should avoid testing the temperature of a bottle with their mouth, sharing utensils (such as spoons), or cleaning a pacifier or a bottle nipple by putting it in her mouth. It is good to consider the need for a pacifier and the potential complications that can result from its use. Pacifiers can impede healthy breastfeeding, result in thrush and ear infections, cause a latex allergy and misaligned teeth and speech problems.<reflection>Do you already have a mouth cleaning routine?Do you feel funny cleaning baby’s mouth even though she doesn't have any teeth? How does baby react when you try to clean her mouth?Are you following hygienic use of bottles/pacifiers?Who can help you learn more about your role in guiding baby throughout her life?<keywords>dental health; hygiene; eating; teeth; brushing; gums<episode>Bedtime Routine<index>NURTURING CARE | 9<tagline>Set a consistent, calming bedtime routine for your baby that may include a bath, brushing teeth, changing into sleeping clothes, and singing a quiet song or reading a book.<takeaway>A bedtime routine cues bodies and brains to transition to sleep.<overview>Bedtime routines matter. Baby learns what to expect when routines are predictable. Baby will learn that once she has been changed and fed, her teeth are cleaned, the lights are off, and she is read a book or sung a song, it is time to start calming down. This will help a smooth transition since baby will know what is happening and what is expected of her.<practice>By the time baby is 6 months old, adults can start establishing a bedtime routine with her. Every night, baby can go through her routine in the same order. Keep the routine simple and always consistent. For example, first brush teeth, do diaper change/use the toilet, put on pyjamas, read a book, sing a lullaby, and cuddle until baby is drowsy. Then put her in her crib. Give the routine time and be patient. Soon baby will rely on it in order to be ready for longer periods of sleep.<reflection>Do you feel calm during baby’s bedtime routine? How will you know if the routine is effective?What are your feelings around “crying it out?”?What do you usually do at baby’s bedtime?What works for you? What might work better? Who else is involved in baby’s bedtime routine?Do they understand why bedtime routines are important?
<keywords>Sleep; difficulty; habits; routine; brain development; physical; moods; emotions; memory; success at school; well-being; genetics; consistent; routine; awake; self-comfort
<episode>First, Next, Last<index>NURTURING CARE | 10<tagline>Name what you and baby are going to do together, in the order of what will happen.<takeaway>Baby will feel more secure and comfortable when daily routines are consistent. She will learn to anticipate what is coming next.<overview>As she grows, baby learns what to expect. As she gains experiences, she will get better at choosing appropriate behaviours for the situation she is in. She will also get better at preparing for changes. This is part of baby’s growing ability to self-regulate.<practice>Giving baby information about what is happening during daily routines and routines helps her anticipate what is going to happen next. This helps her feel secure and comfortable. It also builds her vocabulary and communication skills. It also builds her vocabulary and communication skills. Keep it simple, short, and not too far into the future. Only describe one or two events that are happening close together. Once a sequence is established then repeat it whenever you are doing it. For example, bath, clean diaper and feeding or brush, pee, bedtime, story.<reflection>What routines do you and baby go through every day? When during the day do you already have a routine?When during the day would you like to start a routine?
<keywords>Repetition; routine; security; predict; cause & effect; control; anticipate; consistent; safety; trust<episode>First Foods<index>NURTURING CARE | 11<tagline>When baby is around 5 or 6 months old, she is probably ready for you to introduce her to solid food.Early feeding often requires you to grind the food first for baby. Try to get baby to eat what you are also eating.<takeaway>Touching and tasting different foods builds baby's interest and willingness to try new foods.<overview>At around 6 months old, baby can start eating nutritious solid foods. Watch for the signs—she is able to sit up on her own, she moves her head independently, and she is interested in what adults are eating.<practice>Learning to eat food is messy work. Baby explores the world around her using her senses. The more familiar she is with the food she is offered, the more likely she is to try it. Adults can let baby feel the food with her hands and try to feed herself as she shows an interest. This may mean having two spoons available—one for baby and one for the adult. This is an important time to introduce your baby to nutritious country foods that have been cooked to a soft consistency. Quaq and nipku are also very effective when baby is teething. Always monitor eating. Check to see how well she is moving food from the front to the back of her mouth. Adults should always stay close by in case baby chokes.<reflection>How much time do you allow for baby’s meals? How can you encourage exploration of the food as well as eating it? What do you do to prepare for the mess baby will make?What foods do you think baby likes?Do the books you read with baby give you opportunities to talk about food?Do you encourage baby to see the foods you are eating and tell her how yummy those are? Model good habits.
<keywords>Breastfeeding; 6 months- 1 year; solid; food; growth; spurt; nutrition; health; milk; bond; texture; 6-9 months; 9-12 months; homemade; menus; Breakfast; feeding; baby; food; caregiver; serve & return; eye contact; smile; happy; communication<episode>Sharing Feelings<index>NURTURING CARE | 12<tagline>Make faces that mirror baby’s facial expression, and name what baby is feeling.<takeaway>Babies are starting to learn about their own emotions and the emotions of others. They should be learning the vocabulary of many different feelings.<overview>Baby, like older children and adults, will experience many different emotions. When adults acknowledge the emotions that baby shows, they help her express and understand what she is feeling and thinking. It sets the foundation for baby to learn about the feelings and emotions of others, and shows baby that her parents, siblings, and other people around her all have feelings too. All of this lets baby know that it is okay to express emotions.<practice>Encourage parents to label both the physical action and the emotion being felt. For example, “I can see that you’re crying, you must be feeling so sad.” This helps baby to link the two words “crying” and “sad,” so she will be able to recognize the emotions better. Remind parents to share their own feelings and to model coping skills; for example, a parent might say, “I am feeling sad. I’m going to listen to some music; that will help me feel better.”<reflection>What does baby see on your face while you are experiencing high emotions? Do you also remember to express and show emotion when the feelings are positive?Are you giving baby the appropriate words for different emotions/feelings?
<keywords>Self-regulation; emotion; competence; feeling; empathy; temperament; adversity; cognitive; development; social; non-verbal; cues; identify; modelling; trauma; language; social-emotional;

<episode>Holding a Drinking Cup<index>NURTURING CARE | 13<tagline>Let baby practice drinking with a cup that has a little water in it.<takeaway>Babies start to develop coordination and self-help abilities by practicing new skills.<overview>It is important to understand what baby is capable of doing and when she is ready. Give baby as many opportunities as possible to practice new skills with a parent by her side.<practice>At around 6 months old, baby can hold a drinking cup with both hands. The best cup to use is an unbreakable one that is the size and shape that baby can hold with both hands. Baby can start with an empty cup to practice, and later try with a few drops of water, and progress to larger amounts as she is ready. The cup should never be too heavy for baby to handle when filled.At first there will be a lot of spilling, so water is a good choice to start. In fact, water is always the best choice for a child. Children do not need juice in their diets and juices are harmful to growing teeth. A child should have only about ¼ cup/60 ml of juice per day or none at all. As baby’s skills improve, adults can gradually increase the amount of liquid that is in the cup. Adults can prepare to clean up spills by having a cloth nearby and maintain a positive outlook on what the baby is learning, rather than focusing on the mess.<reflection>What is your reaction when baby spills?What is your response when baby successfully drinks from the cup?What can you say to baby to encourage learning language throughout this experience? How can you anticipate and limit the mess?
<keywords>Drinking; water; cup; development; coordination; self-help; spill; learning
<episode>Stranger Anxiety<index>NURTURING CARE | 14<tagline>Practice leaving baby’s side for just a few minutes at a time.<takeaway>Making strange is a sign of baby’s developing thinking skills, and her growing awareness of the people around her.<overview>At around 6 months old, baby may start to cry when she is put in unfamiliar situations or is left with unfamiliar people. This means she is starting to recognize the difference between people she knows and trusts, and people she does not. For most babies, around the time when they are 8 to 12 months old, they go through a stage when stranger anxiety is at its peak. Often this anxious period will pass as she gets older. Once baby begins to learn the skill of object permanence – that objects exist even when they cannot be felt, seen, or heard – she will begin to feel better about her caregivers leaving and gain trust that they will return.<practice>Parents may be eager to introduce their babies to family and friends and may want their babies to experience common childhood events such as sitting on Santa’s lap. A baby who is in the stranger anxiety stage will become distressed if they are placed in a situation that makes them feel unsafe. Think about ways parents can make baby feel safe and comfortable even when she is in unfamiliar situations. Building baby’s network of relationships early in life will also help to reduce some anxieties. Parents may find the following strategies useful for helping their baby cope with stranger anxiety:•	Introduce new people in a familiar environment whenever possible, so baby is in a setting where she already feels secure.•	Let family and friends know in advance that baby will need a few minutes to warm up, before they attempt to get close to her.•	Hold baby and give her some time to get used to the new person before allowing the new person to hold her.•	Be prepared for baby to need to be with someone she knows and trusts if she is meeting many new people all at once.•	Let baby get to know new people gradually, at her own pace.•	Demonstrate a warm and welcoming approach, so baby sees that her parents are comfortable with a new individual.<reflection>Does baby make strange when friends or family hold her? Does it seem to make baby anxious?How can you minimize her anxiety and prepare her for these situations?<keywords>Attachment; bond; comfort; child's lead; anxiety; social-emotional
<episode>Many Ways to Describe<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 3<tagline>Use many descriptive words when talking to baby.<takeaway>When adults use descriptive words, baby develops a more complete understanding of her environment.<overview>When adults describe the things baby sees, hears, or feels, it strengthens her understanding of the world around her, and in time will help her to describe the things she experiences as well. Adding a little bit of extra information is a small task that has a big impact on baby’s vocabulary development.<practice>Baby takes in information through all of her five senses; sight, touch, sound, smell, and especially taste. Adults can think about this when they describe items to baby. Casually mentioning colour, shape, size, scent, texture, and numbers brings baby’s awareness to these details.“Those four wheels on your truck are so bumpy; can you feel the bumpy tires?” “You are colouring with an orange marker. It even smells like an orange.”“Your soup is hot; see the steam coming up? Let’s blow on it.”“Would you like a red cup or a green cup? You’d like the green cup. Green is like the grass outside. ”<reflection>How does it feel to add more detail when you are speaking to baby? Does baby have preferences in colours or textures?How can this activity help encourage baby’s appreciation of nature? Or awareness of her environment?What are the words in Inuktut that better describe what she is experiencing?<keywords>describe; narration; language; expression; literacy; syllabic; writing; tradition; vocabulary; language; details; senses;
<episode>Making Marks on Paper<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 4<tagline>Encourage baby to make marks on a large piece of paper that you have put on the floor. Talk to her about the marks she makes.<takeaway>Using crayons, markers, and other writing tools is an early stage of literacy.<overview>First “drawings” will mostly be lines and curves. Baby is starting to understand that she can make marks on paper. Later she will see that the marks can represent an object or idea. At first, baby will colour at random, but before long, her marks will have more purpose. As baby starts to control her arms, hands, and fingers, she will make deliberate marks.<practice>Offer baby a blank piece of paper and a few crayons. Talk to her about the lines she makes, and the colours she is using as you colour together. Use blank paper - baby is not yet ready to try to colour inside the lines of a colouring book. Provide examples through your own drawing. If baby says ball, draw a circle so that she sees that shape and can try to repeat it.Baby can also make marks, by drawing with a stick in the sand, running a finger through frost or fog on a window, or using a pen and pencil on paper.Adults should supervise carefully, as baby might draw on walls, floors, or any other handy surface. Watch to keep crayons, markers, and paint out of baby’s mouth. Try saying “Colour on the paper,” or “Put the crayons in the box when you are done.”<reflection>Does baby see you making lists, or using a pen and paper for other purposes? How can you gently bring baby’s attention to this?Is there opportunity for her to write on your list as well? Has baby shown interest in colouring?What can you say if baby colours on the walls or puts crayons in her mouth? What importance does art play in your culture?How can you bring baby’s awareness to the lines and shapes in art that is around her?
<keywords>Art; language; self-esteem; creativity; gross; motor; development; fine; serve & return; back & forth; expression; emotion; caregiver-child; bond; expression; describe; narration; language; expression; literacy; syllabic; writing; tradition; vocabulary<episode>One Word, Many Ideas<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 5<tagline>Interpret what baby is saying and expand her ideas.<takeaway>Baby may use one word for many purposes. Acknowledging her attempts to communicate gives her confidence to speak even more.<overview>Between 12 and 24 months of age, baby’s vocabulary grows. Since she knows a limited number of words, she will often use one word to express a complete thought. "Ski-doo" might mean, "I am on the ski-doo," "Where is the ski-doo?" or "The ski-doo is fast!" Baby understands different ways a single word can be used.<practice>Adults can listen carefully to the words baby uses and try to understand what she is saying. They may need to guess what she means based on her tone of voice, gestures, or the situation. Repeating the word back to her and using it in a full sentence tells her that someone is listening and trying to understand. For example, if baby says “ski-doo” and parents understand it to mean “I am on the ski-doo”, they might respond, “yes, we are on the ski-doo. We are going to Anaanaasiaq’s house.” Baby will be encouraged to talk more when she sees that her efforts to communicate work. Baby is trying to make sense of how a word is used.Paying attention to cues in the environment can help you interpret what baby is saying. If baby is sitting with a cup of milk and smiles, then says, “imuuk,” she is probably saying she likes the milk. Caregivers can show baby they understand by saying, “Yes Meeka, you like your milk.”<reflection>What words does baby use?When can you use the words baby knows, so she hears them in different contexts? How can you expand her understanding of certain words?How can you help build onto words to complete thoughts: imuuk – imuukguaqpii?
<keywords>Serve & return; communication; bond; connection; caregiver-child; receptive; expressive; language; joint attention; secure; attachment; expanding; validating; adult-child interactions;
<episode>Reading Friendly Home<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 6<tagline>Let baby see family members reading.<takeaway>When baby sees reading is a part of her family’s day, she learns that reading can be both fun and useful.<overview>Reading is an important life skill, and it is helpful for baby to develop a positive attitude about reading right from the start. Baby is aware of the people around her. She notices their likes, interests, and habits. When she sees adults reading, she understands that reading is valued. Reading includes books, magazines, and newspapers, or any other form of written communication, whether in print or online. Adults who model a love of reading promote a reading friendly home.<practice>Reading takes many forms and spending even a few minutes with a magazine or answering text messages counts. Adults can talk about what they have read, starting conversations with, “I was reading the other day about….” and point out when others are reading, “Daddy is reading his email.” Baby will see reading as a natural part of daily life.<reflection>Do adults read often in your home? Do you enjoy reading?What kinds of books did you read as a child? What did you enjoy reading about?When could reading fit into your day?
<keywords>Reading; language; books; pictures; communication; learning; literacy; development; story; routine; early literacy; writing; magazines; newspapers; 

<episode>Saying Words Correctly<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 7<tagline>If baby mispronounces a word, repeat it back to her in a sentence rather than correcting her.<takeaway>Baby learns how to say words when she hears them in conversation.<overview>Learning to talk is a complex process. It requires control of the small muscles in the lips, tongue, and throat. Talking also requires the ability to remember which sounds to use at the right time. As baby uses more and more words, she will have own versions of familiar words, particularly words that do not fit the regular rules of language. For example, baby may say “mouses” instead of “mice.” Correct grammar and pronunciation takes time and lots of practice.<practice>Adults can use correct grammar and pronunciation when talking to baby and use “serve and return”. Listen to what baby has to say and respond, modelling the right way to use the word. Keep interactions positive and supportive. If baby says “mouses”, an adult can reply, “Yes, there are mice in this story.” In the same way you need to emphasize the very subtle differences in syllabic sounds used in Inuktut. Often Inuit play games with language to help make these distinctions. When sounds are very similar children practice responding to the appropriate sound such as the differences between “qaaqpii” and “qapi” and “qaqpii”. Developing strong listening skills with Inuktut language is part of early language training.<reflection>Have you ever tried to learn a new language? What were some of the challenges?What helped the process?Are there words your child mispronounces? How do you respond?How can you provide lots of opportunities to practice, practice, practice?
<keywords>Language; serve and return; grammar; pronunciation; talking; modelling; interactions; support; games; sounds; repeat; learning; speech; development
<episode>Read the World Around You<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 8<tagline>Pointing out words in the environment helps baby develop her awareness of letters and words.<takeaway>Babies learn that words and pictures have meaning.<overview>Early experiences with print contribute to later literacy. When adults draw baby’s attention to words in her environment, they are helping her understand that printed words are all around them, and these words and pictures are a source of information. Baby then starts to look for words and pictures wherever she goes. She may start to ask what they mean as she continues trying to understand the world.<practice>Adults can look for stop signs, store names, posters/billboards, food boxes, exit signs, or any other words, pictures, or text that they can show baby as they go about their day. Point to or indicate a familiar sign in the neighbourhood, or notice the words written on her shirt. When the word and picture are together, i.e. picture of strawberries on a strawberry yogurt container, help baby to notice both so she understands that they go together. Remember to keep this activity fun and follow baby’s lead. Soon she will start pointing out signs herself, asking what they say.For Inuit, it is also critical to learn the signs in the natural world and to help the child be able to read those. Notice and point out changes in weather, things in the environment, animal behaviours. Reading the real world will always be important. Encourage the child to begin to make connections in what is being seen.<reflection>What signs do you notice in your community? In your environment?Does your baby have clothing with words on it?What words or pictures can you show your child in your home? Is your baby’s name on anything in your home?How can you encourage observations skills?
<keywords>literacy; language; environment; reading; observation<episode>Two Word Sentences<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 9<tagline>Repeat and expand baby’s two-word sentences.<takeaway>Repeat and expand baby’s sentences to give her new ways to express ideas.<overview>Baby shows that she understands how language works when she starts combining words into sentences. First, she will put two words together, then three, and then four. She is expressing her thoughts with more complexity, recognizing that using more words conveys more meaning. Baby will probably use active words “Daddy walk” that get the message across clearly, rather than using full grammar “Daddy is taking me for a walk.” Hearing someone else add detail to what she says helps her to gradually use more words.<practice>Baby may need extra time to find the words she wants to use to express her ideas. Adults can support her by listening patiently, letting her express herself in the best way she can, then building on what she has said. Asking questions that she can easily answer, then expanding on her answer, gives her opportunities to put words together and hear them repeated in new ways.•	“Do you want the pink blanket?”•	“Pink blanket.”•	“OK, here is your pink blanket. It is warm and fuzzy.”<reflection>Is your baby starting to use two or more words at a time? What are some words she is comfortable using?Is baby able to add chunks to words to form simple sentences? Ani—Aningjuaq – Aningjuaqtuguut. How are you building Inuktut language structures with your child?
<keywords>adult-child interactions; positive guidance; responding; language; communication
<episode>Pointing in Books<index>LANGUAGE MATTERS | 10<tagline>Take turns pointing to items in a book and naming them.<takeaway>When baby and adults are paying attention to one item at the same time, baby is able to absorb a large amount of information.<overview>Reading with baby can be a positive and enjoyable experience. When adults offer many opportunities for baby to be involved in the book, she is learning a lot as well. She hears adults labelling items she may not have noticed before, and she gets to share what she already knows. This solidifies her understanding of the words.Reading together in this style allows baby to hear many words. This helps her understand more and more. The more words she understands (her receptive vocabulary,) the more words she will start to use (her expressive vocabulary.) This improves her language skills. With strong language skills, baby can communicate her wants and needs, get along more successfully with other children, enjoy and do better in school. While she may not be involved in activities like this yet, in her early years she learns the skills to be able to accomplish these tasks later on.<practice>Adults have been working towards building a literacy rich environment for baby since birth by communicating actively, reading books to her, bringing her attention to print, and drawing together. Now, adults can work towards baby’s involvement in print materials such as books.Choose books that are exciting to baby, that baby shows a preference for and that relate to her life. When she sees that you are enthusiastic, she will feel excited to be involved. Adults may begin by pointing out pictures in the book. “Here’s an eagle on this page. Can you touch the eagle too?” It helps when adults show excitement and give positive feedback when baby responds. This will encourage her to continue participating.Later, ask baby questions about the book to encourage her to think about it. Then, point to the answer. For example, “Can you show me something the baby needs when she goes to bed?”<reflection>When throughout the day can you point to items other than books and talk about them? Are there particular items baby is interested in?Where are opportunities to talk about them more often? How can you further baby's understanding of those items?How can you create opportunities to link the new vocabulary and information to real world experiences?
<keywords>Toddler; reading; age-appropriate; picture; book; problem solving; language; fine; motor; development; repetition; story; telling; interactive;  talk; sing; pages; personal; story; routine; books; learning; see; show; say; early literacy