<episode>Separation Anxiety<index>NURTURING CARE | 1<tagline>Help baby learn to trust that her significant caregivers will always come back.<takeaway>Baby feels strong emotions when her parents or other caregivers leave.<overview>Separation anxiety is a normal part of development. Baby experiences anxiety when her parents or caregivers are out of sight. She may cry, cling to her parent, have a tantrum, or hit and kick anyone within reach. Her intense fear of having her parent leave may seem excessive to the adults around her, but she is genuinely afraid of being apart from the person she trusts to take care of her.Separation anxiety can be challenging for parents. Many will feel guilty for leaving baby or worry that baby will cry the whole time they are gone. Parents can use a few simple strategies to help everyone through this difficult phase of development.<practice>Prepare baby for what is going to happen. You might say, “You are going to get to play with all the toys at daycare today. You’ll have so much fun.” Have a quick, consistent way to say goodbye, such as giving baby a kiss, saying I love you and waving bye-bye, then immediately leaving. The consistency will become familiar to her and she will have the opportunity to practice regulating her emotions.Start by leaving baby alone in a room for a few minutes at a time. Say, “I’m going to get the broom, I will be right back.” Come back and say, “Here I am, I got the broom and now I’m back.” Work up to taking the dog for a walk while she stays home with another caregiver she knows, gradually building up to longer periods of time away.Baby is just starting to understand time. She has no concept of how long her parent will be away, or if they will come back. Give baby something to hold on to when her parent is gone, such as her mother’s scarf, or give her a small photo album of family pictures that she can look at. Baby will feel connected to her family and gain confidence that they will come back. Because baby feels safe and secure with her parents, it can be scary for her when they leave. Fostering a trusting relationship means that parents let baby know they are going away, even if they know baby will become upset. It may be tempting to slip away without saying anything, but that can create even more anxiety, because then she may worry that her parent might disappear at any time.Even after baby seems to manage goodbyes easily, she may sometimes have separation anxiety again. This may happen during times of stress, illness, or sudden change in her life (such as the birth of a baby brother or sister). To help baby feel secure again, give her the same consistent, loving support as you did during her first bout of separation anxiety.<reflection>Which other caregivers does baby have a relationship with? Who do you trust to leave baby with?How do you feel when you have to leave baby? What can you say to baby to help her feel at ease? What will be your routine every time you leave her?<keywords>Toddler; separation; anxiety; secure; attachment; bonding; comfort; parting; routine; love; attention; stranger; danger<episode>Safe and Stimulating Environments<index>NURTURING CARE | 2<tagline>Take steps to ensure that baby’s environment is a place where she belongs.<takeaway>Baby takes in information by interacting with the world around her.<overview>Baby learns from the people she is around and from the places she spends her time. When she is in safe spaces that provide opportunities to play, she feels respected and knows that she belongs in that space. When she knows that she belongs she will be confident that she can do things for herself and feel free to explore the materials in her environment that she can learn from.<practice>Think about the rooms that baby plays in and what is at her level such as cupboards, shelves, tables, chairs, and couches. Create a space where it’s safe for her to play, explore, and learn. It is impossible to completely renovate a home for baby, but by watching what she interacts with and how, you can adapt the furniture and places in your home to be safe while encouraging her development. For example, baby may enjoy opening and closing your cupboard doors – this is a good learning experience for her on how to manipulate the door. What is inside however, could be dangerous for her. It may be wise to move cleaning supplies to a higher shelf for now, and put pots, pans, and plastic containers in the cupboard. That way, when baby opens the cupboard door, all the items inside are safe for her to explore. Try putting a truck inside the cupboards for an exciting surprise! Think about spaces for baby. Babies love to see what small spaces they can fit in. If baby is always crawling behind the couch, it may be a nice quiet space for her. Providing boxes and building “tents” on the furniture are also safe places that baby will enjoy exploring. First, make sure there are no unsafe objects that could hurt her or be swallowed, and then add some of her belongings to those spaces so that she knows she is welcome there. By adding cuddly or calming objects such as blankets, pillows, teddies, puzzles, and books in that space you are encouraging a certain type of behavior.Make sure her toys and belongings are provided to her in a place where she can get them and put them away by herself. This encourages her independence. You may dedicate the bottom of your bookshelf to her blocks and dolls or add a lower hook so she can take down and hang up her own jacket. You could give baby her own basket of books next to the couch or bed. That way, she can take them out and put them away with some help. Eventually, she’ll be able to do it on her own. When you take the time to create a safe play space for baby, it will give you time you need to do other things while still being close by.If there is a place you do not wish the baby to visit, gently guide her away with your hand when she approaches that spot. By consistently doing this the baby will learn not to go to that place and will usually cease trying.<reflection>What in your home is unsafe for baby to play with? Where can you keep it, so that baby doesn't think they are for her too? What items are safe for baby only if adults help her with them?How can adults share these with her and explain how to be safe with them?When sitting on the floor to play with baby, what can you imagine her getting into? How can you plan ahead for that?
<keywords>Support; relationships; intimate; friendships; safety; protection; foundations; positive; environment; nutrition; development<episode>Simple Tasks<index>NURTURING CARE | 3<tagline>Baby understands and can follow simple directions. Baby can begin to take responsibility for tasks very early.<takeaway>A simple task that baby can do gives her confidence and is a way of contributing to the family/pijitsirniq.<overview>Baby is becoming more independent and wants to do many things herself. Adults can give baby simple tasks that she can easily carry out. Baby is proud of her accomplishments and enjoys being helpful.<practice>Use a kind and supportive voice and give baby a simple task that she can do “Put your shoes on the mat.” At first, demonstrate it for baby “My shoes go here, and here is a spot for your shoes. You can put yours right beside mine.” Increase baby’s cooperation and confidence and show her how fun it can be to work together.Give baby some time and repeat the direction if necessary. Avoid power struggles; if she does not do it, try again another time rather than forcing her to comply. Once she has done it, make sure to say thank you to reinforce her cooperation. Children should be tasked with responsibilities as soon as they are capable of carrying them out. This is an expectation of pijitsirniq or contributing to the common good. Once a child knows where to put her shoes, she should be expected to do this every time without being asked. Provide lots of praise and positive feedback when she begins to do this on her own.<reflection>What are some simple tasks you believe baby can do alone? What tasks can baby do with help?How can you balance letting baby try and also offering her support? How could you respond if baby does not do the task?How do you respond when she does?
<keywords>Follow; lead; example; curiosity; play; explore; social; interaction; challenge; agency; interests; incentives; praise; process; outcome; connection<episode>Extended Breastfeeding and Weaning<index>NURTURING CARE | 4<tagline>Follow baby’s lead in deciding how long to continue breastfeeding.<takeaway>Extended breastfeeding is healthy for both mother and baby.<overview>Baby can benefit from breastfeeding into the second, or even third, year of life. By 6 months of age, baby starts eating some solid food, and by 12 months of age is likely getting many of the calories she needs from solids. Breast milk can still be a valuable source of nutrition and antibodies, and extended breastfeeding can provide health benefits to both mother and baby. The World Health Organization and Health Canada both recommend continuing to breastfeed until baby is 2 years old, or longer.<practice>Women who choose to breastfeed their toddlers need to eat healthy food and get enough rest to make sure they can produce milk while keeping up with a busy baby. Breastfeeding beyond 6 months will help to prevent pregnancy. However, if you become pregnant again and intend to continue nursing through pregnancy it is critically important to focus on good health habits for you, your child and fetus.Baby might begin to bite, especially when teething. Let baby know when she hurts you in this way. Remove the breast and ask her to be nice. Try again making sure there is a good latch on the breast. It is less easy to bite if a good latch is maintained.Baby will start to breastfeed less as she eats more and more solid foods and may have weaned herself by the time she is 1 year old, or she may want to continue nursing much longer; baby can continue to breastfeed if both mom and baby are comfortable. When mother and baby are ready, introduce simple weaning strategies to try. Weaning strategies mothers can try:•	Don’t offer, but don’t refuse. If baby asks to nurse, go ahead, but if she doesn’t ask just carry on with the day;•	If baby gets hurt, talk to her about what happened and see if you can find another way to comfort her rather than immediately nursing;•	Find other ways to be close to her so she still feels connected to you. Try things like playing with her favourite toy, reading a book, going for a walk, and colouring or painting.<reflection>How do you feel about extended breastfeeding? How long do you expect to breastfeed?How many times does baby nurse in a day? Does baby eat many solid foods?Does baby sleep through the night?Does baby want to nurse when she is tired, or when she needs comfort? What traditional teachings do you know about breastfeeding?
<keywords>Breastfeeding; vitamin D; nutrients; healthy; eating; food; nutrition; milk; role models; 6 months- 1 year; complementary feeding; Breastfeeding; nutrients; healthy; eating; food; nutrition; milk; role models; 6 months- 1 year; complementary feeding; support<episode>Teething<index>NURTURING CARE | 5<tagline>Help baby to work through the pain of growing new teeth. Be aware of other health issues that may accompany teething.<takeaway>Find the strategies that work best to help you and baby cope through the teething process. Be watchful for signs of teething.<overview>Teething can start from when baby is about 5 months and may continue on and off until baby is about 2 years old. Then, most babies grow in one last set of molars by the time she is 3. Every baby is on her own schedule. You may notice baby chewing on her hands more or drooling excessively. Those are good signs that she is teething.Teething is stressful for both mom and baby. Baby is often confused and in pain, but it may seem like baby is crying for no reason. That’s because it is not always visible when teeth start growing in. This behaviour will come and go with each new tooth, from when the first tooth starts growing until they are all in. When a baby is teething she may start to nip at the breast during feeding times. Let baby know this is painful for you and make sure that when you offer your breast there is a solid latch on so that baby sucks and does not bite down. Side effects of teething could be runny nose, drooling, fever or diarrhea and diaper rash. It can be hard to decipher from baby’s symptoms whether she has a cold, has the flu, or is teething. Parents should know who to ask if they are not sure.It can be difficult to keep in mind that teething is temporary, and the pain will go away. The pain may interrupt sleep, which then interrupts mom’s sleep and can cause frustration. Often when baby is teething the best relief is to be held and cuddled. If this is feeling difficult, find someone who can cuddle with baby for a while you rest or do something else. Use cool things on baby’s gums and have teething toys to help provide relief.<practice>Help baby find relief while she is teething. You can buy different types of teethers. Make sure you get a teether that is simple and has no extra parts. It should be easy for baby to hold, and not filled with a liquid. The liquid in some teethers can irritate the skin if baby breaks through them. Sanitize teethers regularly.Try tying a wet cloth in a knot and freezing it. This is helpful to have on hand in the freezer for when adults notice baby is having a hard day. Sometimes a distraction is the best remedy. Try going outside for a walk or dancing to some music. This will help both mom and baby to feel better.Baby may also start discovering how to use her teeth. This may show up as biting, which adults often think is bad behaviour. Often, baby just needs something to chew on, as chewing gives her relief. If baby is familiar with solid foods, cold, peeled cucumber or a strip of quaq or nipku are the perfect texture for baby to chew on and feels great on her gums. Supervise her so you can be sure she is not biting off pieces that are too big. A bowl of frozen paungaat is also a great option.<reflection>What are some ways that my baby lets you know she is teething? Who can you ask for more information about teething if you are unsure?How do you manage your stress when it is difficult for baby to calm down? Help baby find relief while she is teething.You can buy different types of teethers.Make sure you get a teether that is simple and has no extra parts. It should be easy for baby to hold, and not filled with a liquid.The liquid in some teethers can irritate the skin if baby breaks through them. Sanitize teethers regularly.
<keywords>teething; soothing; physical;<episode>Forks and Spoons<index>NURTURING CARE | 6<tagline>Offer baby opportunities to use utensils while eating.<takeaway>Using utensils to eat gives baby practice using the small muscles in her hand.<overview>Using utensils to eat combines baby’s fine motor skills and hand eye coordination to achieve baby’s desired result to feed herself. For example, when baby has a bowl of applesauce, she has a problem to solve. Baby thinks about the problem at hand and then decides how she will get the applesauce to her mouth. This is practice in using tools to solve a problem.Baby watches her family use utensils to eat all the time, so she already has an idea how to use them. When parents allow her to try, she has a chance to practice. This gives her confidence and increases her ability to take care of herself.<practice>From the time baby begins eating solids, adults may offer her a small plastic spoon for her to hold and explore. Narrate what she is doing such as, “You’re putting your pink spoon in your mouth.” or “Do you feel the rubbery handle on your spoon?” then encourage her with positive wording, “A spoon works well to eat your soup.” It is not necessary that baby uses her utensils properly, just that she has time to try. If she gives up and chooses to use her hands that is okay too.Some parents have apprehensions around giving baby forks. As long as forks are plastic and parents are supervising, they are safe for baby to use. Adults can try putting a piece of food on the end and leaving it on baby’s plate or highchair tray for when she is ready to pick it up and try. Give positive feedback when baby does try, “I like how you’re holding your fork. You got your carrot in your mouth! Yum!”<reflection>What are some tools you use throughout the day? When does baby see adults using tools?How do you feel letting baby use utensils?Are there other “tools” baby might use while she plays?
<keywords>Scientist; experiment; cause & effect; curiosity; innate; science; discovery; learning<episode>Encouraging Positive Behaviour<index>NURTURING CARE | 7<tagline>Tell baby what you want her to do, rather than what you do not want her to do.<takeaway>Baby learns appropriate behaviours when she knows what is expected of her.<overview>Using positive explanations and directions, adults can guide baby’s actions so she learns how to be successful in new situations. Think of a time someone told you, “don’t look behind you.” What did you do? For many people, the answer will be that they immediately turned around and looked. This is a common reaction when people are told not to do something. It isn’t that they want to be difficult. It’s because they respond to the active words “look behind you,” rather than the directive word “don’t." Baby’s language is still developing, and it can take time for her to understand what she hears.<practice>When guiding baby, tell her what to do instead of what not to do. Being told not to do something, “don’t climb” can be confusing. The active word “climb” is now in baby’s head and carries more meaning for her than "don't." Baby may climb even higher! When adults use positive directions “come down” baby has a clear understanding of what she should do.Instead of stopping behaviours, focus on appropriate alternatives. Instead, tell baby what to do - say “touch softly,” or say, "my turn to your sister."<reflection>What are some behaviours you do not want your child to do? What behaviours do you want her to do instead?How can you use positive directions to make this happen?In what situations can baby have freedom to choose her own activities? When is it appropriate to let baby make mistakes in order to learn?
<keywords>Behaviour; attention; connection; communication; secure; base; attachment; control; rewards; unconditional; love; safety; nurturing; connection; self-regulate; Storytelling; disipline; exclusion; correction; guidance; direct; indirect; emotion; memory; culture; tradition; nurturing; respect; disciple; purpose; Discipline; punishment; purpose; potential; teaching; gift; disciple
<episode>Cause Thinking<index>NURTURING CARE | 8<tagline>The baby can begin to think of possibilities at a very early age. Allow them to explore possibilities.<takeaway>Children will develop thinking strategies when given opportunities to solve problems.<overview>Inuit place great importance on building experiences for a child which “cause thought”. This is part of qanuqtuurunnarniq and creates the foundation of creative and analytical thinking that will be required to live successfully. Parents are careful to create opportunities for a child to face a challenge, to solve a problem and to creatively navigate a difficulty. A baby reaching for a toy will be encouraged to find a way to get the toy without the parent’s intervention. A child attempting to carry out a task such as building a tower will be expected to figure out the successful process through trial and error. The parent will not demonstrate or move in to help the child. Inuit encourage making mistakes as the strongest learning situation. Children are simply told that if something is not working to try doing it another way. To encourage this kind of deep thinking, children are not told facts as often as they are asked questions that will help them to arrive at the information they may need.<practice>Create lots of opportunities for a child to observe things around her and to build her own conclusions about what she is seeing. Help the child to formulate the thoughts by asking questions. For example, “I am going to make bannock today, what do you think I will need? Can you find the things I need in the cupboard?” Providing opportunities for exploratory play is one of the best ways to “cause thought”.<reflection>How are you encouraging your child to notice things? Are you presenting your child with challenges she can resolve on her own? What kinds of play opportunities does your child have?How can you use these experiences to expand her thinking?Can you find ways to challenge your child’s thinking by asking questions like “What would we do if…?”
<keywords>Cause-thinking; observation; communication; thinking; exploration; experiences; challenge; problem-solving; trial and error; possibilities<episode>A Strong Identity<index>NURTURING CARE | 9<tagline>Remember teachings you received as a child or look for cultural knowledge to pass down to baby.<takeaway>Honour and support baby’s mind, body, heart, and spirit.<overview>Feeling connected to your culture is part of forming an identity. Baby is starting to understand who she is as a member of her community. Adults can help baby develop a strong sense of pride in her heritage. This will boost her confidence and self-esteem. These opportunities should be lived experiences that will be internalized and remembered.<practice>Give baby opportunities to experience her culture and traditions. Attend ceremonies, expose her to Inuktut terminology in specific situations and connect with Elders who can answer any questions you have. Inuit shared wise words or teachings called inutsiaqpagutit meant to teach children in such as way that “our words will always come back to you”. Use these with your child, repeating them often. They are also a way of setting cultural expectations for a child. For example, “If you want to have friends, you need to be a friend first”; “ Always share what you have with others and you will never want anything”; “People who always want things never learn to be happy.”<reflection>What do you already do in your home that reflects your culture?What teachings (inutsiaqpagutit) do you remember from your childhood that you could share with your baby? Are there elders or traditional knowledge keepers that you can speak to if you have questions?What are some cultural events that happen in your community?
<keywords>culture; teachings; family; stories; land; place; identity;
<episode>Teaching Values<index>NURTURING CARE | 10<tagline>Teaching Inuit values will serve your baby throughout life.<takeaway>Inuit teachings help a child build character, clarify expectations and expect those to result in moral behaviour.<overview>Inuit say the purpose in life is to live a good life. An Inuk lives a good life when she lives according to the cultural values and beliefs. These values are taught as expected ways of being. They are most often taught through parental expectations that were very clearly laid out for children and often reinforced that the inutsiaqpagutit sayings. So, in order to live respectfully with others, you should never touch someone else’s belongings without permission, never gossip or say something about someone behind their back, always share what you have, speak openly and apologize if you do something wrong.<practice>A child’s best teacher is always the model that you provide. As you teach the Inuit values, make a point of demonstrating them in your home. Find ways to emphasize various values at certain times of your child’s development. Some examples for how to do this are provided in the Inunnguiniq Childrearing Advice From Inuit Elders booklets. Inuit emphasize the importance of teaching values that will build character and establish positive attitudes in a child. This is referred to as becoming heart-centred. The more heart-centred a child is, the better able she will be to face challenges in her life.<reflection>What values are you emphasizing with your child? How are you setting these out as expectations?What teachings are you using repeatedly?Are there ways you could focus on building positive attitudes in your child?
<keywords>Values; teaching; modelling; expectations; positive attitude; character; heart-centred; beliefs
<episode>Self-Help Skills<index>NURTURING CARE | 11<tagline>Involve baby in daily routines.<takeaway>Baby gains independence when she helps take care of herself.<overview>Encourage baby to take part in care her routine. As she begins to take care of her own needs, she sees herself as a capable person. Once something has been accomplished it should now be an expected responsibility for the child. In this way, she begins to practice pijitsirniq and contributes back to the smooth running of the household.<practice>Give baby time to practice doing things on her own. She can practice being independent with a pair of socks or hand her a butter knife so she can practice spreading jam on her toast. Provide clothes that will be easy for her to put on and take off by herself, for example; slip on shoes, clothes without buckles, zippers, or buttons.Avoid “rescuing” baby, when she may just need more time, or help. For example, when baby wants to dress herself lay her pants out in front of her and encourage her by saying “Use your thumbs to hold your pants. Push your foot through… you did it! Now try your left foot.” Baby will let you know when she needs help. Be patient and let her try her best. Encourage persistence – giving up should never be an option. Plan for plenty of time so that she can experience success. Don’t ask her to do things that she is not yet ready to accomplish.Celebrate her accomplishment rather than “fix” it. Help her feel a sense of pride in her success.<reflection>In what situations does baby like to take control? What are your initial reactions when baby tries a new skill?How do you notice when she is ready to take something on?How can you set baby up to practice these skills and get better at them?
<keywords>Trust vs mistrust; independence; autonomy; support; "no"; defiance; shame; competence; child's voice; respect; safety; punishment; coercion<episode>Picky Eaters<index>NURTURING CARE | 12<tagline>Provide baby with many healthy options of what she can eat but always encourage respect for the food that is being provided and gratitude.<takeaway>Mealtimes can provide opportunity to learn while being fun and healthy.<overview>Good nutrition is important for healthy brain development. It also gives baby all the energy she needs to play all day.It is common for babies at this age to start wanting to take control over different aspects of their life. Eating is one thing that she has complete control over and so it is common that she will assert her independence during mealtimes. Babies wake up in the morning after not having eaten for a long period of time. This is often the biggest meal she will eat in her whole day. If adults make sure that baby is offered a big breakfast that consists of each food group, it is likely she will take in most of the calories she needs for the day. Because of this, dinner will probably be a smaller meal. Baby will eat when she is hungry. When babies are forced to eat against their will, over time they become unaware of what their body is telling them they need. This leads to unhealthy eating habits as an adult. Let baby be the one to let you know when she is hungry or full. It is important to expose your child to country foods early and throughout life. In this way she will develop a taste and appreciation for country food and come to understand that it is a healthy option.<practice>Have baby help prepare dinner. Find a space at the counter where baby can stand on a chair and be at your level. Baby can watch you chop vegetables or adults may hand her a butter knife to try and cut some as well. Talk about each ingredient—What is it called? Where does it come from? How much do you need? Offer baby opportunities to try the ingredients individually or smell and taste the spices you are using. With supervision, she could even help you stir the pot. When baby takes part in cooking she will take ownership in what she has made and is more likely to try it.Baby will be more willing to try something when she is familiar with it. Give her time to become familiar with the new food and meet her with understanding if she does not want to eat it. If she would like something else, maybe there is a banana she could have instead.Babies need snacks throughout the day between meals. When you offer baby many healthy options, she can choose what she feels like eating from among the healthy choices you have offered. If baby knows that an hour after mealtime an adult will offer her cookies, she will become aware of this and avoid eating her meal so she can have a cookie. Avoid power struggles. During dinner adults may offer her three or four different options on her plate. This way, she feels in control and is more likely to try at least one of them. If she doesn’t like her salad but loves her carrots, adults can offer her more carrots.<reflection>What were your experiences with food as a child? Did you have any responsibilities in food preparation?When did you start helping adults cook? How did this make you feel?How can you ensure that there are more healthy options than unhealthy options for baby? How can you prepare snacks that are quick, healthy, and affordable?How are you making healthy country food options available to your child?
<keywords>choice; choices; child-led; power; positive; modelling; meals; meal prep;<episode>Predicting Routines<index>NURTURING CARE | 13<tagline>Questions about baby’s everyday activities allows her to think about her routines.<takeaway>Baby feels secure when she knows what will happen during the day.<overview>Daily routines are predictable parts of each day. Baby gets to know daily routines extremely well. When parents talk about routines and wait for baby’s input, baby anticipates what will happen next. As baby gets older, she will become ready to do parts of these routines. She may start to initiate them, predict what will come next, and complete parts of the routines herself.<practice>Adults are familiar with talking about routines with baby throughout the day. They are consistent in her routines – such as bedtime. An adult can prepare baby for what is coming up by saying, “First we will put on your pajamas. Then we brush your teeth, and then it is time for bed.” As baby gets older, adults can ask questions about the routine. For example, “First we will put on your pajamas. What will we do next?” Wait patiently for baby to answer. When baby can answer questions, she is reviewing what she knows. That makes her feel confident and secure.<reflection>What routines stay that same for baby every day? How do you ensure they are consistent?How can you tell that baby understands what you are asking of her? What are the many ways she responds?If you go off schedule one day, how does baby respond?
<keywords>Executive; function; self-regulation; child; development; social; emotional; cognitive; working memory; inhibitory control; mental flexibility; prefrontal cortex; skills; Consistency; routine; comfort; operant conditioning; positive reinforcement; ignoring; smile; distraction; "time in"; nurturing; relationship; parenting; responsiveness; behaviour; social; emotional; self-regulation<episode>Giving Appropriate Choices<index>NURTURING CARE | 14<tagline>Offer baby choices that you can accept.<takeaway>Trusting baby to make simple choices builds her decision-making skills.<overview>Part of independence is the ability to make decisions. Decision-making in early in life is preparation for making good decisions throughout life.<practice>Give baby simple everyday choices, such as, “What colour socks will you wear today?” Or “What kind of cereal would you like for breakfast?” It may take a few minutes for her to decide, or she might already know what she wants. Either way, she is practicing making decisions for herself.Offer authentic choices. Adults sometimes phrase things as a choice. “Do you want to wear your mittens?” when wearing mittens is essential. Instead, offer a real choice, “It is cold outside. You will need to wear your mittens. Do you want your red mittens or your green ones?”Choices are useful when baby is asserting her independence. For example, if you are shopping and she decides to sit down in the store and not go any further, offer real choices. “Would you like to sit in the cart and do your buckle by yourself? Or do you want to help mommy push the cart?”Support baby’s choices when possible. For example, if baby decides to do something else when someone is reading to them, the book can be set aside to read later.<reflection>How does it feel when baby starts to become more independent and rely on you less? What are good choices for baby to make on her own?How often can you incorporate making choices into your baby’s day?<keywords>Self-regulation; choice; parenting; behaviour; social; emotional; praise; nurturing; Self-regulation; respect; community; cooperation; problem-solving skills; overwhelming; consistent; ritual; choices; thank; reinforce; "I messages"<episode>Managing Big Feelings<index>NURTURING CARE | 15<tagline>Help baby learn to manage her emotions. Divert any negative reactions and explain that these kinds of reactions are not acceptable.Help baby to think through positive reactions to the situation.<takeaway>Baby’s emotions can be overwhelming. Adults can help her learn appropriate coping strategies.<overview>Baby feels complex emotions such as pride, guilt, and embarrassment. She is an active explorer who is determined to be in charge. This can result in frustration, anger, and sadness when things do not go her way. She is also curious, eager to learn, and excited to experience the wonder and joy of new adventures every day. It is important that a child has the appropriate words to be able to express how she is feeling. Teaching these words early in life will give her more confidence in first communicating and then managing those feelings in good ways.<practice>Talk to baby about her emotions and name them; “That made you really mad.” Baby will learn how to identify her emotions and soon she will be able to describe what she is feeling. “That makes me mad!” Accept and acknowledge baby's feelings as valid but prevent harmful behaviour. “You are angry that Johnny took your ball, but you can’t hit him. What do you think you can do so that you and Johnny won’t be mad at each other?” This is an opportunity to encourage cause thinking and to help your child make good decisions. Pay attention to potential triggers and try to plan ahead. For example, baby is more likely to be frustrated if she is hungry or tired, choose to go shopping after lunch and a nap. If she is attached to a particular toy, remember to have it nearby when she needs it. If she is frightened of loud noises, warn her before using the blender or vacuum.There will be times when adults take charge, even if it means baby becomes upset. Set clear limits and follow through. “You must hold my hand when we cross the street, or I will have to carry you.” Baby learns to manage frustration and anger when she has a calm, kind adult, who helps her to organize her feelings “I know that makes you mad, you wanted to do it by yourself. Now that we have crossed the road you can walk by yourself again.”“When little people are overwhelmed by big emotions, it is our job to share our calm, not to join their chaos.” L.R. Knost<reflection>How do you cope with big emotions? What do you want others to know about helping you cope? What does baby do when she is angry or frustrated?What works to help calm baby?How do you feel when baby is upset?How can you make sure all adults around baby respond to baby’s strong emotions in the same way?
<keywords>Toddler; meltdown; temper; tantrum; management; time-out; isolate; want; frustrated; self-regulation; time-in; success; emotion; nurturing; support; safety; Empathy; sympathy; choice; connection; perspective; judgement; feeling; emotion; self-regulation; support; safety<episode>It’s Mine!<index>NURTURING CARE | 16<tagline>Recognize that as baby grows, she becomes possessive of things she likes. Sharing is highly valued by Inuit and teaching that sharing what we have builds relationships that are more important than possessions.<takeaway>Baby’s sense of self grows when she understands that things can belong to her but also that she can share her things with others.<overview>Baby is learning how to be an independent person who is in control of her own life. One of the clearest ways for baby to take control is to claim ownership of something. She will firmly state, “Mine!” when she sees a toy, a book, a person, or any other object she likes. Baby wants to have power over her life and possessions and wants to make sure everyone knows she is in charge. However, for Inuit, sharing is a sacred way of being. It will be important to allow your child to claim ownership while still being compassionate enough to share her special things with others.<practice>Point out the many ways others take turns with baby. “I turned the page, now it is you’re turn to turn the page.” “That bag is heavy for you. Do you want me to take a turn carrying it?” “Would you like a turn stirring the cookie dough?” “Your brother finished brushing his teeth, now it is your turn.”Give lots of positive feedback when she shares. “Thank you! You shared the plate of crackers; that was so kind!” “You took a turn sweeping the floor. That was very helpful.” “You love your special toy. Maybe your friend would really love to hold it for a while because she doesn’t have anything like that.” Respect baby’s decision when she doesn’t want to share, particularly when it involves something very special to her. “Yes, that is your bedtime blanket. You don’t have to share it until you’re ready to be kind.” Adults may want baby to take turns and share. Sharing is voluntary and occurs when baby willingly gives her toy to someone else. When baby is forced to give up a toy or object, she loses her sense of control over the situation, and is less willing to “share” the next time. Allow baby to decide when she is ready to share but find ways to remind her that this is an expectation in life. If she is busy playing with a toy, for example, she will be less willing to share it. Suggest ways that she could involve the other child in her play. Remember that baby wants to be in control; she will be much more likely to give her toy up if she can do it on her own terms. “Bobby wants to play with those blocks. It might be more fun if you played with them together.”<reflection>How do you feel when someone asks for something you are using? What are some of baby’s favourite things?How are you encouraging the value of sharing? When in baby’s day do people share with her? How can you bring her attention to this?How does your community share with each other?<keywords>Poem; mine; mine; mine; mine; sharing; toddler; ownership; Natural; consequence; sharing; intrinsic; motivation; positive; highlight; emotions; scaffolding; support<episode>From Diapers to Potty<index>NURTURING CARE | 17<tagline>Baby will have been made aware of body functions from birth. By paying consistent attention to this you can help your baby become ready to potty-train.<takeaway>Potty training is gradual and is a significant milestone in baby’s journey to independence.<overview>Inuit babies were generally potty-trained by 9-12 months. How adults consistently respond to baby’s needs has an impact on how successful the process will be. To be fully potty trained, baby must recognize the sensation of needing to go and the parent must be quick to recognize these signs and point that out. Typically, you would ask the child, “Haahaapii?”. This was verbally noticing the need. It is also very helpful when baby has enough language to communicate her needs by saying “Haahaa”. The parent would hold the baby over the diaper or a potty, encouraging the process. The child needs patience and encouragement from the adults around her. When everyone has a positive approach towards potty training, baby develops confidence in her ability to take care of herself.<practice>Notice when baby needs “to go” and quickly respond to this need. Watch for signs that baby is ready to start potty training by alerting you to her need. She may show curiosity about the toilet. She may want to sit on the potty and have a number of successes early in the process. She also may start to notice when her diaper is soiled, or when she is “going” in her diaper, learning to tell the difference between being wet versus dry. Adults can ask baby to try the potty regularly throughout the day, so she becomes familiar with the routine. These times may include before bed, as soon as she wakes up, right after meals, or before leaving the house. Decide whether to use pull-ups or underwear for baby, and when she will wear them. During the day, Inuit often allowed baby to be without a diaper so that the potty use was easier. Adults may decide to continue to use diapers and pull-ups for outings and bedtime, and underwear for around the house. Find a plan that works for baby, and make sure to maintain consistency so she understands the expectations.Accidents will happen, they are part of the learning process. Stay positive throughout this time so that baby does not lose confidence in her ability to accomplish this difficult task. A simple response to an accident might be,“Oops, you are wet. Let’s go get some dry clothes on. Next time, let me know so we can get to the bathroom quickly.” This helps baby becoming more and more independent and confident.<reflection>What was the last big goal that you achieved? How did it make you feel to achieve it? In what other ways can you empathize with baby while she are learning this new task?How do you react when baby has accidents?How can you ensure she feels positive throughout the process?
<keywords>potty training; patience; positive; language; social-emotional; milestone;