<episode>Supporting Baby’s Gifts<index>Family Well-Being | 1<title>"You’re always so gentle with animals."<tagline>Notice the parts of your baby's personality that make her unique.<takeaway> Finding ways to strengthen your baby’s gifts helps parents/caregivers guide her to fulfil her life’s purpose. <overview> One of the main tasks of parents/caregivers is to get to know their baby to help her build on her gifts and to support her in the other areas in which she needs support. By trying to unravel a baby’s gifts, parents/caregivers can help her to develop positive self-esteem. How a baby feels about herself translates into what she believes she is capable of accomplishing.<practice> Encourage Mom to spend uninterrupted quality time with her baby and to observe her in play. While watching her, see which toys she plays with often and where her talents lie. At this stage in her life, she is beginning to show personality traits that make her an individual. This can include having likes and dislikes, favourite items, interests and capabilities. Mom can ask herself, "What makes my baby unique?”It is important that her baby is part of a community. Her gifts might lie in an area her parents/caregivers are not skilled in. Mom might find a friend, family member or Elder who can help to support her baby’s gift. For example, if her baby loves drumming but her Mom doesn’t know many songs, it’s a good idea to find someone who can spend time with her, singing and drumming.Other gifts will become obvious through play. If she is always playing with baby dolls, her gifts might involve parenting, teaching or healing one day. Mom can nurture her baby’s gifts by providing her with opportunities to explore them. When she plays with her dolls, Mom can offer her blankets, baby clothes, spoons and bowls so she can further her interest in babies.A baby with a gift for expression and emotion might struggle with how do deal with her gift when she is a toddler. While she is young her gift might manifest as outbursts or tantrums but she might become a talented artist, poet or musician in adulthood. Mom can help guide her baby by modelling appropriate ways of dealing with emotions and effective ways of expressing them. Mom can help her baby express emotions through art, song or physical activity.<reflection> What are your gifts and how do you share them with others? How were your gifts nurtured as a child?Is there anything you would like to do differently for your child? How can you begin to notice baby’s gifts?Who else in the community can help your baby develop her gifts?<keywords>unique; character traits; interests; individual; child's lead; observation; patience; positive; guidance; guide;
<episode>Male Role Models<index>Family Well-Being | 2<title>"Who are the important men in my baby’s life?"<tagline>Think about who the positive role models are for your child.<takeaway>Male role models come in many forms, including dads, grandpas, uncles, brothers and friends. <overview>Men have an important role to play in raising babies. When men are involved in a baby’s life as she grows, she will develop a positive understanding of men and their roles and learn that men can be strong and supportive as well as caring and nurturing. Knowing this will help her form healthy opinions.Men have different styles of involvement with babies than women do. Women are often more emotional and gentle, whereas men tend to be active and physical. A mix of both these styles work well together for a developing child. Men who have not been shown love in their past might have a hard time opening up to their partners or babies. Spending time with a baby helps dads and babies. When people spend time with babies, the level of oxytocin—the hormone that makes you feel happy—in their body increases. This can reduce a person’s depression. Over time, it also helps men become more nurturing and in tune with their own emotions. As a result, they become more responsive to their baby’s needs. Men will want to be involved with the baby more when they see that the baby is comforted and calmed by their actions.<practice>It takes time to learn how to be a good dad or male role model for a baby. Talk to Mom about who will take on this role and how they can be involved in her baby’s life. Anyone who is new to spending time with her baby will need support. Tell Mom that the men involved in her baby’s life are welcome to use the EY Toolbox cards. Tell her to encourage the men in her child’s life to take part in caregiving routines. When they change diapers, prepare meals or dress her baby, they are creating a strong bond with the baby.Discuss with Mom that a baby needs time with parents/caregivers more than fancy clothes. Encourage Mom to think about ways that the men in her life can spend quality time her baby. They can sit on the floor and play, go for walks or read books together. When her baby spends time with a male role model who is genuine, it will create special moments that her baby will remember.<reflection>Who were the important men in your life? How were they involved?What did they teach you?What are your initial feelings about men being involved in your child’s life?If Dad cannot be there, who can have a kinship relationship with your child to provide positive male influence?<keywords>father; dad; grandfather; grandpa; uncle; family; friends
<episode>Educate and Advocate<index>Family Well-Being | 3<title>"I know what’s best for my child."<tagline>Be the voice your baby needs when she cannot speak for herself.<takeaway>Learn as much as you can about your baby's development. Know who to ask for help when you or your baby need support. <overview>Babies do not have the voice or the insight to fight for what they need. They rely on their parents/caregivers to speak for them. <practice>Encourage Mom to learn about her child’s development and find out about the supports and services available to the whole family. There are many different times during a baby’s life when Mom needs extra support. Dealing with service providers can become overwhelming or stressful and can cause Mom to "check out.” As a Visitor, you can give her the tools she needs to be an effective advocate. This will ensure that her baby’s needs are met. It will also give Mom the confidence to handle similar situations in the future. By becoming educated and practising advocacy, Mom will begin to feel in control of her own life. This increases her hope for the future and will give her baby an opportunity to model herself after strong family members.To learn as much as possible about her child, Mom might ask herself, "What do I want for my child?” "What is my child really good at?” and "What is my child still working toward?”Discuss with Mom how she can open communication channels with people in the community and build relationships between those people and her child. She can start by saying "Hello” or "Good morning” to others in a casual way. When Mom starts to see the positive effects of communication on her baby, she will be encouraged to continue building on it.Sometimes there are struggles with children that come up repeatedly. Talk to Mom about keeping track of her concerns by making a list. She can then bring the list with her as a reminder when she visits her doctor, social worker or you, her Visitor. She could also ask someone to come to appointments with her to listen and take notes. As a Visitor, you can tell her about the services available and help her prepare for what she will do and say when she uses those services.You can inform Mom about her rights and what she is entitled to. As a Visitor, you can help build a strong support system around the family that will help Mom understand what she needs so she can speak up for herself and her family.<reflection>What are your first feelings when you speak to someone about your child’s needs? What can help you to feel confident and effective?Who can you practise with beforehand? How did it go?What would you like to do differently next time?<keywords>informed choice; voice; scaffolding; advocacy; education; parents; additional support needs; disability;
<episode>Roles and Responsibilities<index>Family Well-Being | 4<title>"You pick up your toys, I will set the table and then we can sit down to eat."<tagline>Each adult and child has responsibilities that help maintain your household.<takeaway>Your baby will gain a sense of responsibility and pride when she has age-appropriate tasks to complete. <overview>Each member of the family—immediate, extended and kin—have roles to play. For example, a baby puts her toys away, a mom goes to work, big brother picks up his siblings from school and grandpa makes dinner.While it’s good for children to have time for free play, it is also good for everybody to take ownership of a small piece of the whole family system. This ensures that one person is not responsible for too much of the work. It also builds a sense of responsibility in the children. The family is the centre of a baby’s community. How everyone works together also shows her how things work outside the home.<practice>Toddlers enjoy taking part in small chores around the house. Encourage Mom to see what her baby enjoys doing and can do by herself. Tell Mom to be patient and let her baby finish the task. As her baby grows, she will see the people around her working hard to make sure the family is safe, happy and healthy.Completing household tasks alongside an adult makes them much more fun. Explain to Mom that her baby will enjoy the challenge of bringing plates from the table to the sink or holding the dustpan while Mom sweeps. It can be a lot of fun learning how to fold laundry or to stir the dough for bannock. As her baby grows, some of these tasks will become her regular responsibility. Mom can teach her child how to accomplish tasks so she can do them on her own some day. This will build her pride in her home and family.<reflection>What were your household responsibilities as a child? How old were you when you started doing them?How do you feel about your baby taking on responsibilities?How would you respond if your baby refuses to complete the task?<keywords>tasks; chores; jobs; family; independence; 
<episode>Parenting Styles<index>Family Well-Being | 5<title>"I help to guide baby through her life path."<tagline>Think about the style of parenting that describes you best.<takeaway>Being responsive and setting reasonable boundaries is helpful when parenting. <overview>Often, parents/caregivers raise their children by modelling their own upbringing. All parents/caregivers want the best for their children, regardless of how they express it.There are two main characteristics that combine to create a parenting style. One is responsiveness, which describes how the adult understands and responds to the child’s needs and interests. The other is boundaries, which are the rules parents have for their children and the way they enforce them. Responsiveness and boundaries exist in every family, but each family, through their individual parenting style, has their own way of responding and setting boundaries.<practice>If Mom experienced hardship during her childhood, she will choose to make changes in her own time, when she is fully ready to heal. As a Visitor, your role is to build a strong relationship with her no matter what her parenting style is. Encourage the positive parenting moments you see and build on them. The parenting styles you introduce can provide useful information for Mom; they are meant to encourage her, not to be used to force change.Suggest that Mom think about her own childhood and how that affects her parenting style. Tell her to reflect on her past by asking, "What do I want to do in the same way my parents did? What would I like to do differently?”There are many ways to parent. Talking in groups with other parents who have children around the same age can provide insight. Parenting is a lifelong journey. It is full of challenges and celebrations. Mom can share her stories and listen to others. She can also review the parenting styles chart to decide where they fit and set goals for the future.<reflection>How have your experiences as a child affected who you are as a parent?What are your initial reactions when you notice someone parenting their child differently than you? How do you work to connect with other parents?<keywords>reflection; cycle; influence; education; parents; grandparents; choice;
<episode>Back to Work<index>Family Well-Being | 6<title>"We are ready to try something new."<tagline>Think about the next stages of your life and your baby’s life.<takeaway>Decide what steps you will need to take before you go back to work or school. <overview>Families go through various stages in their lives. As children grow, they need new experiences to help them become successful adults. Involvement with larger groups of children and learning how to get along with new people are helpful. A baby is a social being. When she gets close to 24 months, she will want to play with other children. Child care is a good choice; it can meet the child’s needs and make it possible for the family to invest in their own growth. Parents/caregivers can decide what this looks like for them.<practice>Discuss with Mom what she thinks the future looks like, both for herself and her family. Sometimes it is nice to write this down or share it with someone she trusts. Mom can ask herself, "What are my goals and how can I get there?” She can break the goal down into small, tangible pieces and ask, "What can I accomplish in a month? Six months? A year?”Suggest that Mom look for support that will help her accomplish her goals. Does she need to enroll in school, create a resume or find child care? <reflection>What would I like to see for my family in five years? What would I like to see for my family in one year?What steps do I need to take in order to get there? What does my timeline look like?Who can be a support to me and help me accomplish each step?<keywords>child care; work; jobs; employment; goal; goal setting; 
<episode>Adjusting to a New Baby<index>Family Well-Being | 7<title>"Welcome, baby."<tagline>Take care to help your older child adjust to her new role as a sibling.<takeaway>With time, your baby will become a proud and helpful sibling. <overview>Until now, the first baby has been the only child who needs attention. Depending on her temperament and age, it can be difficult for her now that she has to share that attention. She has a brand-new role to take on. Being an older sibling helps her start to develop empathy. With some preparation, having a younger sibling can be a very positive experience for her.It takes some juggling to look after every family member’s needs during this transition time. Thinking through the process helps it to feel less stressful and more manageable.<practice>Encourage Mom to prepare her child for the new baby early by having a lot of conversations about what is happening. Mom can help her child to gradually understand the importance of being an older sibling and discuss all the ways she can help. Watching Mom’s belly grow and feeling the newborn kick will help her build a bond with her sibling. She might like to read a book or sing to Mom’s belly. Mom can try giving her first child a doll so she can practise putting a diaper on it. She can show her child how to swaddle the doll and take the doll for a walk or feed her a bottle. By reinforcing this behavior, her child will know that soon she will be a big sister and can help Mom do these things with the new baby. While feelings of jealousy are natural, being involved in a new baby’s care will help her feel proud and responsible for her sibling.Discuss the transitions that need to be made early so that the older child does not experience too much change all at once. Mom might need to make decisions about moving her child to her own bed or might need to figure out how breastfeeding is going to work. If Mom is not comfortable nursing both children, she might want to start weaning her first child as soon as she knows she is pregnant.Mom should make time for her older child to spend one on one with her Mom or another adult so that she can have individual attention. Once the newborn is home, she will get less attention. This can be difficult for her to understand. If she knows she will read a book alone with Mom every day before bed, she will be less likely to act out to try to get attention.<reflection>How do you feel about having a new baby?How can you gradually involve your child in conversations about her new sibling? What can she be involved with during pregnancy?What can she be involved in once the new baby has arrived?<keywords>second child; pregnant; sibling; siblings; transition; new role; family dynamic
<episode>Well-Meaning Advice<index>Family Well-Being | 5<title>"Thank you for sharing your experience."<tagline>Family and friends may have advice on how to be a parent. You decide what is best for you and your baby.<takeaway>Recognise that advice is a form of caring. <overview>Everyone has advice about babies, but parents/caregivers should be allowed to make their own decisions for their child and be supported in those choices.<practice>Talk to Mom about how to manage a lot of advice and information all at once. You may want to suggest to her that it’s a good idea to take advice only from people she trusts. When presented with advice or opinions, she can consider it carefully. Is the advice good for her family? Encourage Mom to trust her gut feeling on what is best for her situation. Although no one is a perfect parent, every parent knows their baby better than anyone else.<reflection>If you’re getting too much information, who is providing it and why? Are you curious to find out more about something a friend or family member told you? If so, what is it?Are these sources reliable or is everyone repeating personal anecdotes or superstitions? What can you say to someone who is giving you advice that you are not going to follow?<keywords>family; doctor; doula; visitor; instinct; trust
<episode>Immunizations<index>Family Well-Being | 6<title>"When does my baby get her needles?"<tagline>Immunizations protect your baby from diseases before they have a chance to make her sick. Talk to your health care provider to find out when your baby’s first vaccinations will begin.<takeaway>Immunization is an essential part of every child’s health. Find out when and where to schedule your baby's vaccinations.<overview>It is important to receive vaccines on time. They help protect children against preventable diseases. Immunization has saved the lives of more babies and children than any other medical intervention. Vaccinations are done on a schedule, when children are 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, 12 months, 18 months and then between 48 months and 6 years.<practice>Tell Mom that the community health centre in her area will have designated times and days when vaccinations will be offered. Vaccinations are free. Explain that her baby will be less upset about getting a needle if she is well rested, fed and content before she gets her vaccine. <reflection>What do you think about immunizations? How do you normally deal with uncomfortable situations?Do you have an example to share that might be relevant? How can you help your baby through her immunization visit?<keywords>Immunizations; hearing; health; providers; disease; vaccine; sick; vision; screening; dentist; vision; Immunizations; health; providers; disease; vaccine;protect; safety; well-being; community
<episode>Grief<index>Family Well-Being | 7<title>"I just lost a close friend."<tagline>Ask for support during difficult times. Visitors can be a form of support as you navigate the ups and downs of grieving.<takeaway>In times of loss, it is healthy to grieve even if you are pregnant or have a baby. It is important to allow yourself to feel a range of emotions during difficult times.<overview>Grieving is not easy for anyone. It is important that parents/caregivers feel supported during this time. It’s okay if some days they can’t feel any happiness about their pregnancy or new child. It is important not to bottle up feelings.<practice>Talk to Mom about the positive ways she can release her emotions. These can include writing, drawing, exercising, listening to music, dancing and talking to friends and family. Seeking support is key. She can surround herself with people who respect her grief. It is a natural process that everyone goes through at some point in their life. The variety of emotions that are experienced can be scary for many people, because they do not feel normal. But grief is a normal process and it is important for adults to treat themselves with sensitivity and care during this time. Crying and finding healthy ways to release emotions is important. Tell Mom to talk to her loved ones or an Elder, or to attend a cultural ceremony in her community.<reflection>Who can you talk to when you are grieving? How do you release emotions when you are grieving?Do you allow yourself to cry?<keywords>Bereaved; grief; mourning; loss; support; community; care; nurturing; understanding; mental; health; mind; body; spirit
<episode>Budgeting<index>Family Well-Being | 8<title>"How can I manage my money?"<tagline>A baby adds a new set of costs and financial priorities for parents/caregivers. Making a budget can help you reduce stress.<takeaway>Creating a plan for your money can help to reduce financial stresses. Preparing a budget ensures that you think about your needs and your baby’s needs in advance.<overview>Making a budget helps new parents/caregivers to understand how much money they have each month and where they will be spending it.<practice>Sit with Mom and fill out a budget sheet. As a Visitor, you can help her see where money comes from on a monthly basis and how it is spent. Talk with Mom about immediate wants and needs and discuss longer-term financial goals and hopes.<reflection>Where do you spend money first when you get paid? What are some new or unexpected costs that come with a new baby? How do you save money?<keywords>stress; family voilence; money; independence; food security
<episode>Preparing for Tough Moments<index>Family Well-Being | 9<title>Always have a way to keep safe. <takeaway>All families have tough moments. In times of difficulties, create plans with people you love and trust so that everyone is safe.<overview>In every case, the work of the Early Years Visitor is to support families and reduce harm. Harm can look different in every circumstance. Visitors go at the same pace as families and can support families to create an environment that is safe and trusting. This is harm reduction: helping to keep families safe.Visitors are here to address families’ needs without condition or judgement. It’s important to recognize how the realities of poverty, class, racism, social isolation, past trauma and other social inequalities affect people’s vulnerability to potentially harmful behaviours, as well as their capacity for coping. Harmful behaviours may include using licit or illicit drugs, family violence or being in unsafe situations. <practice> Focus on building the foundations of an open and trusting relationship with parents/caregivers. Take time to listen, without judgement, to their concerns rather than insisting that anyone change their behaviour. In this way, parents/caregivers will be comfortable coming to you during stressful times. Check in with Mom during your visits. You may want to talk to her about recognizing risky behaviours that could harm her children and family members. Give examples of signs of tension in a home. If Mom has difficulties in her relationships, she may have trouble talking about it. That’s normal. Encourage her to talk to someone who makes her feel comfortable and offer to facilitate a referral, if appropriate. Working with Mom, you can implement harm reduction strategies like creating a network of peer support or providing birth control options. Another strategy you can use is creating safety plans for times of conflict. The point of a safety plan is to reduce the potential for harm to the family.<reflection> What types of behaviours may be considered risky or harmful to parents/caregivers or children?What types of behaviours suggest the need for a safety plan?What ways can you think of preparing for safety?Is there anything that is worrying you about this topic?What help do you need to make a plan?Can you think of support people that might be willing to help?<keywords>family violence; stress; safety; safety plan; preparing; harm reduction
<episode>Respectful Relationships<index>Family Well-Being | 10<title>Think about the kinds of relationships you want your baby to experience. <takeaway>Respectful relationships help you and your baby feel safe, valued and happy. <overview>Relationships with partners, friends and family can be both incredibly rewarding and challenging. With time, relationships change. While it’s normal to have disagreements, Mom should feel respected in her relationships so that her and her baby can thrive. Respect is key to healthy relationships. In healthy, respectful relationships, a person trusts that they won’t get hurt emotionally, physically, financially or in any other way. <practice>Sometimes it’s hard to figure out if a relationship is healthy or unhealthy. It may be easier to look at elements of power and control. All families share power and control in different ways and it’s good to reflect on these dynamics sometimes. Ask Mom to think about the good relationships she has experienced. What made them feel good? How could she tell they were respectful? Did Mom feel like she had equal power? Did Mom still feel like she was in control of her life? What were her favorite aspects of these relationships? How can she model them for her baby? If Mom is experiencing unsafe power dynamics or difficulties in a relationship, she may feel shame and not want to talk about it. She may worry about keeping her family together or want to protect the other person. Conflict occurs in all relationships and is a natural result of stress and tension. Explain to Mom that these feelings are normal. Encourage her to talk to her support network or to a professional who could offer advice and guidance. <reflection>What are the strengths of your familial and romantic relationships?Have you found that your relationships have changed?In what ways have the relationships closest to you gotten better? In what ways have they become more strained?Do you feel safe in all of your relationships? If not, what happens that makes you feel unsafe?<keywords>family violence; education; informed choice; safety plan; partner;